Co-op Interview 12.14.21 - END - For Intern Training

Pamela  00:00
With, I'm the Oh, Quinn's joining us too. So we have two students, Cheryl, that are they've been studying under Dr Mary White, am I correct? Yep, yes. And she they've been working on learning about research techniques, and they're doing it through an indigenous lands so I actually ordered some of the books. I think one of them is called research is sacred, and it's about conducting research in native communities and how to protect the sovereignty of that data. So I'm really excited that we have these college students that are here with us today, so I'm going to go ahead and get started. I have something that I need to read to you. And the southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute has been awarded a grant by the US Department of Agriculture, the National Institute for Food and Agriculture. The subject area is a comparative study of citizen, native and First Nation led cooperative development in the US and Canada, and analysis of factors associated with the development, growth and challenges of those cooperatives. The goal of the proposed project is to better understand cooperatives within the traditional boundaries of native and First Nation lands, and the factors that contribute to the development and growth of these cooperatives are the lack of it. Through the study, we seek to expand rural native business opportunities by identifying factors associated with First Nation cooperative growth and sustainability and in in the US and Canada, and sharing these with native nation leaders and their citizens in the US and Canada, the project has been approved by SIPI’s Institutional Review Board. All information gathered and analyzed will be de identified as he has to the individuals interviewed, the name of the native led cooperative and the host nation, if there is one, unless the host nation gives us permission to share certain de identified information for the benefit of other native and First Nation communities. So Cheryl, you do have the option of granting permission to share certain de identified information if you choose to. Okay. And so after reading that, I just need to ask if you have any questions about this study before we start. Okay. I have a question. Okay, that's for Sandy. Sandy, should we start recording now? Yes, they're already recording. Quinn, I can go ahead and speak for him.

Quinn  03:03
Okay, so I'll start my recording as well. Thank you.

Pamela  03:11
So I'm going to start with the first group of questions, Cheryl, and we'll get rolling. Okay, okay, all right. This one is about the cooperative profile and what is your position? Well, first of all, I need to know your name, the name of the cooperative, and your tribal affiliation.

Cheryl  03:33
My name is Cheryl Lowman. I'm a member of the Round Valley Indian tribes. My tribal affiliation is Northern Paiute-Concow and Noma lackey. And the name of our cooperative is E’ Numu Diip. E’ Numu Diip in our Paiute language means our people's land.

Pamela  04:08
And what is your role in the cooperative?

Cheryl  04:10
I serve as the project manager. I'm also a landowner. I'm also the founder of the E’ Numu Allottee Association, and also I have a consulting business where I contract with a cooperative to provide project management services.

Pamela  04:38
And how long have you been with the cooperative.

Cheryl  04:42
Our Cooperative was formed in 2017 the E’ Numu Allottee Association was formed in 2014

Pamela  04:59
alright. Right? And is there anyone else that's employed with the cooperative outside of yourself?

Cheryl  05:07
We do everything by consultants, and I do all this team building. It's a single leader team building process we use.

Pamela  05:24
and how many members

Cheryl  05:28
you mean of our co-op? Yes, please. Right now we only have 17. We are working on the bylaws still. But we hope to have 22 however, there are 30, approximately 30 landowners.

Pamela  05:57
And is there any other relevant information that you about the cooperative profile that you'd like to share?

Cheryl  06:05
Well, ours is one of a kind throughout the nation, you won't find a cooperative like ours that because we own our own land and we're not under the jurisdiction of a tribe, and our land is legally defined as Indian country, and is trust land [trust land is Indian Trust Land under Federal law]

Pamela  06:39
When the first time I met you. That was the first time I'd ever heard of federal trust, allottees. I never had heard of that before. So it's really, really, really interesting. So the other the now I'm going to go into like background and environment. Are there examples of businesses that have been formed within your community. And how have they before? How have they been formed? How have they worked out? And what is that community's attitude towards that, towards the businesses?

Cheryl  07:15
Well our community is, is the landowners, and we have our priorities, but our first priority is to get access to the land. We have built fences in accordance with the surveys, because the Bureau of Indian Affairs allowed fences to be built that were not on the property lines. We dug a well so we got some water. So we're focusing on our infrastructure, but our first goal is to have a organic seed farm, and we're in the process of planning to bring back our traditional foods that were overgrazed by ranchers who leased our land that was leased out by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA).

Pamela  08:19
Have any cooperatives be beside the cooperative that you currently are part of have been formed in your community?

Cheryl  08:27
No, we feel that our cooperative, under our cooperative, we would be able to do several projects. We have done a test on regenerative grazing, and that type of grazing is geared to deal with climate change and also the restoration of our land.

Pamela  09:00
I really just appreciate the work that you guys are doing, especially with you know how you're thinking ahead about the impact of climate change. So are there any issues in the community that you hope that that your cooperative can help improve or resolve.

Cheryl  09:26
Oh, definitely, the cooperative can the reason we formed it. And let me back up. The allottees have formed our nonprofit, and the allottees have formed the co-op and the allottees serve as board members on the nonprofit and on the co-op. The reason being, everything is controlled by the landowners, as it should be. We don't want anybody else telling us what to do with our land anymore. Our theme is not your Indian anymore, that that's geared toward the BIA, us Indians around BIA.

Pamela  10:19
So the other things that you're hoping that you can improve or resolve. It sounds like you you mentioned, you know, doing the test and regenerative grazing and gearing that towards climate change. What are some other things that you're that you see in the future for your cooperative that can help and improve.

Cheryl  10:41
Well, another one of our goals is to be off the grid. You'll notice in the background, this is allotment 18, and you see how flat it is, and that's the old fence. I put that up there the old road, the old fence as a reminder to show our progress. You know when we see it how it is today, but we're looking at doing a micro solar business. Our well is going to be run by solar pumps. Our organic seed farm will be run, you know, energy will be provided through, through the solar panels. So that's what we're working on today. I mean, we've got quite a few things in the bot. We just finished. We just finished the studies on how much water we're going to need for our traditional plants, and that's another way to conserve water to deal with climate change. Everything we do is going to be organic. Our land is organic. We have no pesticides or nothing on there. And even the cattle that we have led on there, the rancher we're working with is Mennonite, and they're very organic and climate oriented. So we have a good relationship there, but eventually we'll be putting our own cattle, buffalo or whatever, on our land.

Pamela  12:29
So I know that you mentioned this earlier, but are there any issues the cooperative has helped to improve or resolve?

Cheryl  12:40
Absolutely, it's given us a future for economic development, for agricultural products that we're going to be producing. We have quite a few agricultural studies. We have an agricultural economist who put together our strategic plan for us on dealing with all kinds of products.

Pamela  13:14
Okay? If, okay, this is this question, and I know that you were at there at the beginning. So this is kind of talking about concept and mission. How did your cooperative members learn about what a cooperative should be and do? Did you like example? Did you visit other cooperatives? Did you read reports? What other types of sources did you guys look at?

Cheryl  13:41
Well, to begin with, we were assisted by the Northwest Cooperative Development Center out of Washington. Diane Gassaway, the executive director, has been with us since 2014. She has facilitated. We put together a steering committee, and she and Jim Wabanado from the Indian land tanyra Foundation. They facilitated our meetings. They provided funds for meeting places. You know, they because we didn't have any money, and we were just starting out, but you can't do anything if you don't know where you're going, when you're going to do it, how you're going to get there, and how much it's going to cost, and who's going to do the work. So we're big on planning. (Note: later in the analysis process we may want to eliminate the names mentioned)

Pamela  14:38
Did you visit any other cooperatives when you guys started out or connect with any other cooperatives?

Cheryl  14:47
No, okay, because I don't think other cooperatives well. Where I live here Madras, there's a co op. It's a farm cooperative, and they charge you a dollar to be in it, and it's geared to all the agricultural around located around the town. So there are some models, you know, that we looked at, but there's not our model is so unique because we're we own our land, and it's all about our land, and a lot of cooperatives. Oh, by the way, our cooperative leases our land. Our cooperative has first priority at leasing our land, and so we've leased our 640 acres to the co op. And through the co-op, we put together agreement to do our test for regenerative grazing (definition?). So, you know, we look at our organizations as tools, because we're not a tribe. Now, you know, we don't have the flexibility of enacting any kind of laws and codes. However, the state of Oregon is the best that we have because we are citizens of Oregon too, and not only tribal members, but landowners, and our land is exempt from state laws other than public law 280 which is law enforcement and the counties. And we've been working with the county. There's a big water wars that are going to be starting up here, and we had to let them know who we are. They diverted our water rights, but they're not doing a good job, and we are first in time, first in right, because we, you know, the land is indigenous to our original people, and the water rights go with the land, not the person.

Pamela  17:17
Did your steering committee mold the cooperative around tribal values and our principles?

Cheryl  17:24
Well, it's hard to say, because we're Indians. Everything we do is tribal values. And so it's just, you know, there's no identifying it. It just is, right? That's just how it is, yeah, oh, no. We have elders, you know, elders who keep us straight.

Pamela  17:53
I like that. Okay, did you adapt standard cooperative development approaches to meet the needs of your members of your community.

Cheryl  18:10
Well, it's in our bylaws, articles and bylaws and our strategic planning business plans that we put together. Our biggest priority was money. We had to get money, so we did a lot of grant writing. One of the advantages, though, is the co-op, we were able to get an equip grant environmental quality, something grant Improvement Grant is equipped by the USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service, and that has been a real benefit for us to know that our cooperative can seek some funding.

Pamela  19:10
So how are community assets identified and used to form the cooperative?

Cheryl  19:17
Well, depends. If you're talking about asset building, we didn't do that. However, you know, an example of asset building is like a car on a reservation is the highest priority because it's a rural community. However, a car downtown Portland is not a priority because you have transportation there, and our allotments are very rural, as you can see, and so in our planning process, it was the first phase was focused on agriculture. However, some of our allottees want to live on their land, so we'll be looking at other ways to get buildings and other things on our allotments. Actually, you might say we're building a town. We're building a little town now here. And some say we're building our own tribe because, you know, everything we're doing is we're not under the jurisdiction of the tribe other than our tribal affiliation.

Pamela  20:41
Yeah, so it's really your you're exercising self-determination and sovereignty.

Cheryl  20:50
Well, our, the superintendent at the Bureau of Indian Affairs says we're acting like a self-governance tribe. And I said exactly. I said we are self-governing ourselves. We don't want you bothering us.

Pamela  21:11
So I just want to back up to something that you had said about do you have the same issues? Is your allotment land? Because, like when you live, you know, within the traditional territories of your nation, when you have allotment land, it has no value to a bank because they can't repossess it. Is that the same thing with federal allotment land? I'm just asking for my own curiosity,

Cheryl  21:37
yeah, well, we can mortgage our land, okay? And then the Bureau of Indian Affairs, I forgot what department they do, loan guarantees. Okay? We can go to a bank, and then naturally, you know, they're going to deny you, yes. And so then when they find out it's going to be 90 95% guaranteed, then they have a different attitude, yeah, although we we don't want to mortgage our land at all. We don't. We're trying to work without getting any loans until, until we have to. Okay,

Pamela  22:15
so right now, like the what you're talking about, and of course, some of those things are, you know, they're in the planning stages. But this question is, how did products or services offered by the cooperative reach the market previously? And it kind of sounds like it wasn't there previously. No, it

Cheryl  22:35
wasn't. However, we are developing our website to do e commerce, okay? And we haven't. We haven't released it live yet. We're still working on it, okay? And it's how do I want to say this do in our website, through our Co Op, people will have the opportunity to sell their products. For example, you know, we might give an acre to maybe some kids and let them grow their vegetables, and they can market it through the co op. Okay, that's, you know, one, one way of looking at

Pamela  23:23
it, oh, I'm sorry, go ahead.

Cheryl  23:25
Well, there's, there's, there's, there's so much opportunities and the complexity of having an A Co Op, you know, it isn't as easy as just putting together your articles and your bylaws, because you're dealing with low income people in rural communities, and part of the co op is you're required to invest in your co op. And the other issue is the financial stability, you know? Well, I'm, I previously was a, I'm considered a forensic account, so I'm spending a lot of time setting up our chart of accounts and projecting with our CPA how we're going to account for products. And you know, it gets real interesting when you get into the cost of goods sold, the the inventories, the equities, the all of that stuff is it's overwhelming to individual persons. So you got to make sure that you have the right person to do this for you in your co op. And so far we, you know, we, we do everything by consultants, but eventually we will be having to hire people to to do, you know, once, once we start. Really going. But for now, we can manage it through the board. Manages it through, through our single leader, project manager, me,

Pamela  25:13
you just keep them all in line. I have a I just want to back up to that last question, because really what you had previously, if I'm correct, what I heard you say is that your allotment land was under the control of BIA. Was handling all your land leases for you, and it was cattle, and they literally overgrazed your allotment land. Am I correct?

Cheryl  25:37
Yeah, that's lack of lease compliance, okay, all right, mismanagement of trust assets is what it's called,

Pamela  25:45
okay, that's a, yeah, they're kind of famous for that, okay? And then seeing, I don't know if this question even applies, because, you know, the question above was like, How did products and services before, you know, how did they reach the market? And there really wasn't a market before, except for leasing, for cattle grazing and,

Cheryl  26:15
oh, there are, there are some markets for our products. For example, the casinos, if we're going to grow agricultural products, you know. So you know, we have looked at trying to buy Indian and have our products be marketed as native made.

Pamela  26:41
So previously, kind of the it sounds like the value was set by what the BIA was able to obtain for a lease, correct for the land, and you're changing that value proposition now.

Cheryl  26:56
Oh, yeah, we, for the first time, see the bureau when they sign a lease, that's a federal undertaking, and when it's a federal undertaking, all these laws the federal government is comply, is required to apply for, like NEPA, ARPA, the archeological Protection Act, all of these laws kick into place. Well, they've never complied with these laws, and what really stood out was when USDA Natural Resource Conservation Service issued the grant to our co op. Well, that's another federal undertaking, and they did the archeological surveys and the environmental reviews and all of that stuff on our allotments and we did soil sampling we you know, it was just amazing to see what a government agency can do In exercising their trust responsibility to us our land, not only the BIA is not, you know, the all the federal government is responsible for, the trust responsibility to land in Indian country, so to speak.

Pamela  28:18
Okay, now I'm going to go into kind of like values and community. Do you have a sense of how you and your culture influence the cooperative?

Cheryl  28:35
Again, we're Indians. Our Co Op is designed. It's, it's, it's for us. And it's hard for me to break it down and explain it to you, if you, if you find a better way, let me know.

Pamela  28:52
Well, I understand what you're talking about, because it really, it's really hard when you tell a non native audience about what drives what we're doing and why we do it, and how and even the way that we listen to the needs of our community, because we really are the most informed, legitimate resource for handling our own problems and having solutions to them, and I understand what you're talking about, because I, I the other day, I was working on a project, and they were asking about, well, why are you doing this? And and it's like, okay, we've been asking for this for 30 years, and nobody has listened. So we're taking we are taking hold of it, and this is how it's going to be done. Because this is because they're going, Well, did your community inform this decision? And it's like, holy we've been screaming it from the towers. You know for 30 years that these are things that. We need in order to function properly and do the best service that we can for our communities, and they still don't get it. So I understand what you're talking about, and I and I love that what you had said earlier about, oh my gosh. I just, I just loved it. What you said about we're not your, we're not your,

Cheryl  30:27
we're not your, yeah, we're not your Indian anymore. Yeah,

Pamela  30:33
okay, well, I think this is, that's a great answer. So we're going to just move forward. Are there any, have there been or are there any issues between the co op and the local community?

Cheryl  30:45
Oh, yeah, there the other you know, we're only four allotments. There are like 65 allotments located around us, and they're all at 160 acres each, and they're all owned by other individual allottees. And when we first started out with the Numa lat Association, there was a lot of interest, and we were really, you know, happy, thinking we were going to do some great things, except, you know, how tribal members are tribal politics got into it, and so we decided just to narrow it and keep it with our family. And if we develop these models and other allottees want to use them with their families and whatever, great. But so that's why we decided to to narrow our focus. That way we won't set ourselves up to fail. Okay,

Pamela  31:50
are Have you received any Have there been any issues with the greater community beyond your allottees, the native allottees? Um, I Well,

Cheryl  32:06
I just sort of think that the greater issue is the water rights issue that the county and the state is doing. We monitor it, but if we have to, we'll file the claim and put a stop to to that, and they know it, but we're just monitoring it right now. You know, the minute that they tell us we can't do our wells, we can't do this, that we don't have water rights, they're going to find out who has the water rights, because we're first in time, first and right, okay? And we've, we've also put together a study on the allottee water rights that is posted with the University of Colorado in the natural resource and Environmental Law Review. It's, there's a volume there that has to do with our allotments.

Pamela  33:13
Can I'm going to ask you another cultural question. Hold on, girlie. Okay, I'm ready some indigenous communities use cooperatives to reinforce traditional systems and values of Native nations and First Peoples. Is that the case here? Well,

Cheryl  33:38
we're using both of our organizations, the nonprofit, you know, to get money to implement like our traditional foods. You know, everybody knows that Native people, the health issues are just awful, and it's because of the bad foods people are eating. So we want to bring back our traditional foods. Hopefully we will through our organic seed farm, you know, reproduce, I think it's called propagate, or something, seeds, so that maybe we can send send them out to other tribes or individuals who want to plant, you know, restore the traditional foods

Pamela  34:29
so well, that's that you guys are doing really important work. I'm really excited about your cooperative. This, this section kind of goes into ongoing operations, and part of it, this isn't going to this isn't going to apply to you, because you're not on tribal land, even though you are on Indian land, you know what I mean. But how do you keep the community? Do you. Do you work with your tribal leadership even though it's off, you know, it's off tribal land. Are they engaged with you somehow, or do you keep them in communication about what you're doing? Are you just out there doing your thing?

Cheryl  35:13
Oh, well, we market ourselves through, like the Affiliated Tribes of Northwest Indians. They're, you know, consortium of, I think, 59 tribes. Some of our allottees are members of the burns Paiute Tribe in Oregon. And as you can see, you know the picture there, you'll see that fence. Well, on your left side, I believe the good fence. Well, there is no good fence in this picture, but the fence, the fence over that side, okay, is owned by the burns Paiute Tribe. They have a they have a statute in place that says, if a individual Indian passes, individual landowner that passes with no heirs that let that allotment goes to the tribe as part of their reservation. Oh, and so our allotment 18 is right next to it, so we could say we're on or near an Indian reservation, you can, yeah, no, we can, but the tribe is not interested in doing anything with their allotment. You know, we, we would like to involve them, but they're not interested. So we, we're, we're going forth,

Pamela  36:39
okay? And then the the next question is, can you share examples of how the community collaborates with your cooperative?

Cheryl  36:49
Well, they lease our allotments the community, if you're talking about ranchers, some of the some of the allottees were purchased by non Indians and became fee land. But see, our land is like 20 miles away from the town of burns. There's nothing there, yeah, so it's you know, the definition of community is really broad, okay, you know, so we're going to have all types of communities, yeah.

Pamela  37:39
Are, are the other allottees. You know, when you talked about the other 64 allotments, are they engaged with you on any level? Are they still kind of doing their own thing and don't want to be

Cheryl  37:52
they're just, they're just leasing their land, letting the bureau lease their land. Okay, alright, we're the only ones who are doing our own leasing, yeah, and and paying everything, managing our own land.

Pamela  38:08
So if we're looking now, we're looking to the future, what does your board need now to continue to grow, prosper and sustain the cooperative?

Cheryl  38:21
Well, it's they need 10 of me. They need they need expertise. One of the two of the our board members are young men. And we're hoping, you know, we're hoping that you know, all of this is for our future generations, because my my mother never left, you know, all when we got the land, the Bureau was leasing it, and it was really bad shape. So we don't want to leave that for our future generations. And so we are training, hopefully, training our young people to be managers. We're hoping we have scholarships that we're hoping to encourage people to or the youth to take up degrees in agriculture. I mean, it's not just being a farmer or rancher. You can be a lawyer, you can be all kinds of things. Accountants. We badly need accountants. So those are the kind of things that the board needs to make sure that they are are aware of, and sometimes which we struggle with, because we want to do everything by the, you know, from the landowners, but we might have to bring in new some board members, maybe like a banker or an attorney or. Somebody, somebody to help. Because a lot of our board members, I think their education level is not that high. One board member has a he has his business degree, his Bachelor's in business degree, I believe

Pamela  40:25
so. Is this the same or different set of needs for the cooperative membership in general? Are all your landowners? Are they all on the board of directors? Or is it just a few of the 17 people, how do you Well,

Cheryl  40:45
it's it's not easy to become a member of our Co Op, because we, our bylaws state that we pay a membership of $50 annually? Well, that's not happening. And so collections in Indian Country is pretty bad. And so what? I guess, you know, I'm all about the money. I mean, you have to have money to do anything, and it's my hope that when I leave, I'm supposed to be retired. Of course, I'm always going to be a landowner. So as long as I'm a landowner, I'm going to be involved, but, but if they, if I leave, or we split up, then you know who's to know where everything's going to go. So it's really important for all of us to stick together, okay? And we know that, and we all do stick together.

Pamela  42:09
If this cooperative has an effect you hope for in the long run, what would it look like like if you close your eyes? What would it look like if everything was working the way that you've envisioned it. What would be happening on those four allotments?

Cheryl  42:25
Oh, we would have our projects under our co op. One is we're going to farm the sun through solar and we're going to manage our water, our water rights, and, you know, to conserve water, we're going to restore the land by putting back the Traditional Foods or plants and wildlife, fish and wildlife. Um, uh, and hopefully our people will be living there.

Pamela  43:22
Okay, if you were thinking about because you are an elder, so it's kind of and you started this project as probably pretty close to being an elder too. What advice would you give to yourself, kind of at the start of this cooperative journey looking back. What? What advice would you give yourself?

Cheryl  43:48
Well, you know, it's really hard. That's a really tough question, because I never work alone. You know, I work I work through teams. I work. I work with all the allottees to make sure that they are informed, that they understand what is happening. They I call the board meetings so that the board can make decisions on things that we have to do. They issue resolutions to give me guidance. The I guess the best advice I could say, is to teach my skills to the youth. You know, once I'm gone, it's you know that institutional wisdom goes, and that institutional wisdom is so important from our elders and even our language, we want to restore our language, because you can't really have your culture if you don't know your language. Yeah. And I don't know my language.

Pamela  45:05
I don't either, but I keep trying me too. I just keep trying. I have a class that I take from Cherokee Nation. It's two times a week, and they do it online. I love it, and I have the best instructor. His name is Mister fields, and he's probably, he might be around 80, and, oh, he's the best teacher in the world. I just love him, because he just adds so much more than just what's in the lesson plan, you know. So I always leave with I'm always happy after I get done. It just kind of feeds my it's like Chicken Soup for my soul being able to do that. So I've had, you know, classes at my house. I've, I've stayed, but a friend of mine, I we were talking about that, and I said, for some reason, I just can't retain it. It's little grandma and grandpa always spoke the language in the house, but they spoke Indian to me. I mean, they spoke English to me, and maybe thinking that they want me to do better, you know, than they did, because they English was their second language. And then my mom and dad met in boarding school, and my mom, you know, would talk about how they were marched to school, and, I mean, to classes. And you notice things like she would embroider our pillowcases and iron our sheets, and that's kind of a sign that she was being trained to be a maid for somebody I don't know, but I guess a lot of that and our my grand parents always spoke Indian to my mom and my aunts, but they'd answer back in English, and they all went to boarding school. Yeah. So it could be part of that, yeah, still impacting us today. Oh,

Cheryl  47:21
I believe it is. I really do. And I have a problem, like, I'm self conscious when I talk me too, because it's like, oh my, you know, like, I'll, I'll catch myself when I just get a solo bowl, it doesn't roll off my tongue the right way. And, you know, I still remember I did my whole answering machine in the language, and my grandma called, and she goes, Why are you telling people to hate you? Because I went, Oh, see, oh, to hate you. Well, it's to hit you, and I didn't pronounce it correctly. And she Why are you saying that? Why are you telling people to hate you, you know, like, hello, hate you, you know. And I I thought, Oh, man. And then I'd be talking, I'd be talk, trying to talk to my relatives in the language, and they'd be just looking at me like they'd say, keep practicing. Yeah, we have self conscious and I just feel like I think that's what holds a lot of us back. I think when we're older, because we don't want to make mistakes, where a child will just jump right in and they don't care. Okay, well, they never say things right when they're little. Oh, yeah, they pick it up really fast. Yeah, we have fluent Paiute language speakers in our our group and even on our board. And you know, they do speak the language in board meetings, but they intimidate me, because I just don't have that the way they talk. I just don't have it so. But you know the the Paiute language. So there are so many dialects. You know, the in like the burns people call themselves, what did to come means to eat and water is seed. So they're seed eaters. And my grandfather was Gita Tika, and Gita is Groundhog, so they're groundhog eaters. And some of our cousins are from Pyramid Lake, and their queen we took means they're fish eaters, you know, and that's how the Paiute people of the Northwest basins used to identify themselves, not by being Paiute, but by by what they ate in their traditions and all of that stuff.

Pamela  49:52
Oh, that's interesting. Oh, yeah, I have some I've got some more questions. If you're willing to keep rolling with me, I'm willing. A few are you? Oh, yeah, you're such a good sport. Okay, these are, these questions are about, it's kind of general business, questions about the co op. So the co op is located in what's the community called. Is there a name for it?

Cheryl  50:21
We have a language. I mean, we have an address. If you notice the roads there, see there's one, one access road coming into the allotment 18. And I did, I did. I got some money to do from rural business development grant to do an access road. And so our neighbor, who is off the grid, they're non Indians that are surrounding us that own fee land. They put in part of a road, and some of the road is owned by the state. And so one of them has a mailbox. So they, we know they have an address, but we, we use our vice president's address. It's one Paiute Street, and it's located on the burns Paiute reservation. So and then we have our mailing address, which is in Madras. So we're a virtual organization. You know, the co op is a virtual organization that manages our land. Okay, I'm really big on virtual organizations. Well, it seems to be the trend, especially in our rural communities, that's how we have to function, because you can't. There's just so many challenges and barriers that we need that virtual, that kind of virtual identity. And there, there is, sometimes there isn't even the infrastructure in some of our communities to have like a bricks and mortar presence. So we're, we're operating from our kitchen tables, you know, in our communities. Well, if you remember, our ancestors were nomadic people, yeah, you know, and they didn't, you know, they didn't have a house and a grocery store and all of that, it was there, yeah,

Pamela  52:25
and no mailboxes, right?

Cheryl  52:27
But we're what we want to do is we want to put a office there for our our association and our Co Op, okay?

Pamela  52:38
And,

Cheryl  52:42
and we're looking at raising funds to put that building there. And also we want to put a, I don't know, a sweat house, something for our ceremonies. So we can, you know, we we haven't really blessed, blessed our land like we should, but we want to, and we're going to, okay, well,

Pamela  53:03
that's good. Now you have 17 members right now, correct? Yes, okay, and you're, you're planning on growing it just 22

Cheryl  53:14
Yes. Well, when we got our, when we got the equip grant, the USDA Natural Resource Conservation services wrote us a letter about our farm operating plan, which is great. We have a farm operating plan, and in that farm operating plan, there were actually a 16 members of the Co Op, because those members were all members of good standing, and they filled out the forms that was required for the the USDA. And so then they, they would take, you know, 116 and have a percentage like point. This is 625, so if we do a distribution, a patronage distribution, to our members, we use that distribution, percentages and that and that is taxable income. Anything under a co op is taxable, yeah, and then, but the leasing that the co op does when they lease our land is what you call trust funds, and that money goes out to the individual allottees, and it's distributed by the their percentage. Or all of us have a under what is called an undivided interest percentage, and the title status report in the BIA is how that money is distributed, and that's called trust funds. And so you see, that's why I'm saying we're very unique. So you probably won't find anybody like our organizational structure is set up, and it's very complex. That's why we're still hammering out our bylaws. We're gonna amend them again, but when we amend our bylaws, we have to have all the members approve it. Where it was easy when we first formed, because we just had the board, but now we have members, and that gets very complicated. Okay, do

Pamela  55:31
you have a Do you currently have an annual revenue? You don't have to answer any question you don't want to answer, oh, can just saying,

Cheryl  55:41
well, the annual revenue to the lattes comes from our co op because we have a 10 year lease and the Co Op, the co op annually pays, pays that money to the landowners, okay, But the co op through our regenerative grazing projects. We charge the the lessee, we charge them to put their cattle there. For example, 100 last year, it was 175 head of cattle. And we, they, they, we did an agreement because our attorney advised us just to do an agreement under the lease for the co op.

Pamela  56:26
And

Cheryl  56:30
so they the agreement stated that the cattle would say two to five days under each paddock. We divided them into 40 acre paddocks, and then retook, rotated them around the land, and that's the best way to regenerate your land. And then last year, this year, we put 187 cattle on however, because of the drought and the extreme heat wave that we experienced the foliage there wasn't as great, so the lessee didn't stay there as long, but we generated, let's see, last year, it was $4,000 for 20 days, Okay? And if you compare that to when, what the lease, the BIA leased our land for, for a five year lease at like maybe $300 a year, and we pulled it in and less than a month. So you know it's that Co Op is a real nice tool. We look at our nonprofit and Co Op as nice tools.

Pamela  57:50
So would you say that you're right now, your current annual revenue? Would it be under 25,000 a year? Would it be 25 to 5050? To Well,

Cheryl  58:03
when we apply for grants, you know they're not used as matching. There's usually no matching funds, but you have to demonstrate leverage, and right now, our leverage is at $235,000 so the budget for our nonprofit is $235,000 but that includes the equip grant. That's 140 it includes the Rural Business Development Grant, it includes the Native American agricultural fund grants, and then it also includes our we would have annual membership fees, so we're looking at building the budget. However, the nonprofit does not have the three year finance that's required, you know, and so our, I mean, the the co op doesn't have it. The nonprofit serves as a fiscal agent for our co op. Okay?

Pamela  59:12
So really, the your revenue right now is really setting with the nonprofit to manage and distribute, getting, getting those opportunities for the

Cheryl  59:21
Yeah, other than the membership fees and the revenue generated under the lease in the co op.

Pamela  59:29
So how, how does the cooperative distribute profits or funds to the members, the

Cheryl  59:36
patronage for I explained that earlier, is we use the percentage that was put together in our farm operating plan by USDA to distribute revenue, or patronage revenue, to our patrons. However, the board. Does control that the board can decide that maybe we, you know, we shouldn't be making the distribution Okay, and it just depends, because we don't want to pay taxes.

Pamela  1:00:18
So your so your patronage amount, if I heard you correctly before, if I remember correctly, it's 16.25 is that? What you said?

Cheryl  1:00:27
The percentage is 6.256250

Pamela  1:00:32
boy, you don't want me working in your books. Your members would they'd go, we love that woman. Bring her back. Give her a raise,

Cheryl  1:00:43
yeah, but if we increase it, that percentage goes down. Okay.

Pamela  1:00:48
So what strategies, strategies did you or do you use to raise the raise capital? So it sounds like has it been mostly grant funds and some member funds, yeah,

Cheryl  1:01:02
at this time, yes, but we have been approached by many investors, and for example, you know, we have a business plan for hemp and projections, and we've had been approached for people who wanted To invest in growing hemp on our property, even marijuana. But, you know, we thought about it, and hemp is even in our language, we ha, we ha, ho and but we thought about it and with the headaches that come with it, and it wasn't a stable I mean, there was a lot of money there, but there was no infrastructure or stability in raising the hemp. And besides, we're our trust land. We're federal, so we have to comply with federal laws, and until the farm bill came out and made it legal for us to grow hemp. Yeah, we couldn't grow hemp, yeah, but, you know, we've been approached to put a warehouse on there to make light bulbs and but you know, there's a lot of things you have to think about, your waste disposal, you know, your energy resources, staff, hiring staff, all of that stuff. And since you're remote, how where are they going to live? They're going to try travel 20 miles every day to come work, you know? So those are things we're thinking about, maybe putting a farm labor bunk house or something out there for seasonal workers. That's a

Pamela  1:02:46
great idea. Well, now do you do you have a budget? Um,

Cheryl  1:02:55
well, anytime we do grants or anything, the numu a lot to Association takes 15% and so if that's actually for overhead and stuff, but basically the direct costs, you know, that money that just goes out under the grants, okay, I'd like to have, uh, we're building our budget slowly, okay, but not right now, maybe I need to hire a executive director who you know can really do a lot of fundraising and all of that, or you can pay organizations you know to fundraise for you. But yeah, I just don't want to let anybody into our our stuff yet.

Pamela  1:03:45
No, that's probably wise, and and then you still control your narrative. That's really important. A lot of times when you hire somebody from the outside, they add things to your narrative that really kind of skew it, and it can actually cause more problems, I think, in the long run. So if so, if you have a budget for your grants, but you don't have a budget really established for the cooperative yet, it's more for the grants. I know that's kind of a tough question, because when you're working in those two worlds, you really do have a budget for the Co Op, because the grants are driving, you know, they're bringing the funding in. So, you know, if you're thinking about it, I'm going to ask the question this way, and they're listening to me. So if I'm, if I'm wrong, I'll hear about it later, they'll gang up on me. And if they do, I'm calling you Cheryl, I'm going to say they're being mean to me. No, the so if you right now the budgets that you do have established for all the grant money that you have in, how often are you reviewing it? How. Often. Are you looking at it? Is it weekly, monthly, quarterly, annually?

Cheryl  1:05:05
We do? We do our accounting monthly, because the banks, the bank statements come out sure you know. So the the co op has their their bank, and the nonprofit has its bank. And then, of course, we have credit cards for both entities so that, you know, we can work.

Pamela  1:05:28
Some of these questions are a little bit they're kind of, they're they're duplicate of the earlier questions, but it's asking about who provided the technical assistance. So you did have, you did use a co op developer, and that was Northwest cooperative services. Is that right

Cheryl  1:05:51
north? Yeah, Northwest cooperative

Pamela  1:05:54
development center, okay, and that's Diane.

Cheryl  1:05:58
She started us,

Pamela  1:06:00
okay, and she's still working with you, right? Oh yeah, yeah, she's Diane's really a talented woman. Oh yes, she is.

Cheryl  1:06:11
And so is Jim wabadatti from the Indian lantern air foundation.

Pamela  1:06:15
I don't know him. Oh, I'm going to have to, because they're, they're not too far for me. They're just maybe 20 minutes from where I live, so I should, yeah, I live in Saint Paul, so I should get to know them. Oh, and and then Indian land tenure, I want to put that in

Cheryl  1:06:32
there. And then also the inter tribal Agricultural Council, yup, intertribal, AG, see, we don't work alone. We have partners, we have friends. We never work alone.

Pamela  1:06:44
No, it's that's so important.

Cheryl  1:06:46
And we have you Pamela.

Pamela  1:06:51
And then you did, you did do a feasibility study, right? And a business, oh, yeah, okay. And then we have our

Cheryl  1:06:59
strategic plan

Pamela  1:07:00
also and strategic. Did you, this is the question, did you adapt the standard that the kind of the standard cooperative development approaches to meet the needs of your communities, or did you just straight across the board, adopt the cooperative kind of the standard cooperative development plan?

Cheryl  1:07:21
No, everything was done through, you know, the steering committee or the board, our strategic planning process. And, you know, we, we brainstormed about a lot of things. However, the organic seed farm seemed to be the best and and that's why we put the cooperative together. But that doesn't mean you can't have projects under it. Yep, exactly. We don't want to have 20 million co ops. We just want to have one that is geared specifically towards our mission. Okay?

Pamela  1:08:06
Okay, I got another question. Did you work with anyone else in doing these things? Or did you, you know you mentioned who your partners were up above, or did you only do this work among your members? Or was it this question is kind of

Cheryl  1:08:23
it's, well, let me give you an example, the rural Okay, the Rural Business Development Grant. When you apply, you apply to get technical assistance, which means you hire professional consultants to do the work for you, and I'm the person who does the team building. I pick, I pick our team that's going to do what we need. For example, when we did the strategic planning, you know, I had, I had a legal person, I had a economist, I had a engineering firm, I had, and then, in addition to our partners, And then with me, and then, of course, what comes with me is my husband. He is, he's got an MBA with the forestry degree, degree. So he is does all our natural resource stuff for us, pro bono. And so we're very fortunate to have, you know, those kind of partners pulling in the right consultants. You can't just hire any consultant. And once I got them, I kept them. I keep them because it's really hard to train them about us. Yes. And you know, for example, the Northwest cooperative development center paid for an attorney for us to do our bylaws. I finally told Diane. I said, I'm tired of training your attorney. You're paying him for money for me to train him. Stop. So we quit. So she pulled him back, and then I pulled the attorney and that I knew Who knew us and who understood everything, and she's just fabulous.

Pamela  1:10:35
Well, that's a really having the right people at the table. Yes, it's kind of like the secret sauce. And when you can get those people all working together and there's a high level of trust, it's like there's no you can't do that's a really valuable point. Do I have another question, do all your members have to be? Do all of your members have to be tribal members

Cheryl  1:11:11
in the co op? It says you have, I mean, in the bylaws for the Co Op, it says you have to demonstrate that you're a descendant of the former malheur Indian Reservation, okay? Or and, or the snake and Paiute Indians, okay? So they have to demonstrate a tie to us, but, but we help anybody that you know, any allottee that really needs help. For example, we went up to we were invited by the Shoshone bannocks up to Fort Hall Pocatello, Idaho, to tell them about our allotments and what we did, our success stories and all of that stuff. And it was wonderful. We I've thoroughly enjoyed being around the people who, you know, they're, they're, they're so excited about hearing they don't have to listen to the BIA, you know, they don't have to listen to their tribe, even though they're on the res. It's their land. Yeah, and you can do a lot if you want to. There's this awful suppression mindset that comes from the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and I seen it a lot with the allottees out here. Is that, oh, the Bureau is going to do that for you, or you can't do that because you don't have the Bureau's permission, and we're just trying. That's where this, not your Indian anymore, came up. Is you know that? You know we're taxpayers, that federal government agency works for us, we don't work for them, and so you know, our new superintendent is wonderful. I love her, and we're working together on a lot of things. And I wish that for everybody, but I know

Pamela  1:13:12
it's not that way. No, it's not, it's not. It really, you really fortunate, but you're also the where I feel, where you're really fortunate is that you have the inside on working for the BIA and knowing how that organization operates. And so, you know, I think that that was, that was kind of an important tool for you to have in helping this cooperative, you know, goal and to but there's a shift happening. I see it throughout the country where, whereas native people were saying, No, we're not going to do it that way anymore, we've been doing it your way. Now we're going to do it our way, what we know that works best for us. So I love that again. Some of these questions, I apologize. This is the first time that I've done this part of the survey. So we'll probably have a meeting tomorrow and talk about some of these questions. So What process did you go through to start the cooperative? What did you like? What was the first thing that you did to get to get this going? Oh, well, we had to, you

Cheryl  1:14:23
know, our steering committee, okay, we had, we had, we. We had to do is plan our strategy and for economic development. That was what we wanted the cooperative for, because we didn't have, we didn't want 30 of us out there on our land doing different things, so we had to stay focused. And the co op is a way for us to speak with one voice and a way for us to work together without, you know, dealing with the conflicts. And as you know. You know the the forming of groups, you go through the forming and the storming, and a lot of people don't make it through the storming and the performing and the norming, if you know that cycle, if you understand it and mitigate the storming part. And by the way, I used to be a registered mediator, so doesn't mean I could mediate, you know, you I have to create neutral ground. It doesn't mean I could mediate it. But I understand a lot of that and and so every time we see that the storming, because some when a new group member comes or, you know, we change our strategy, it starts all over again. So you got to focus on that storming to make sure that we all stick together. That's how we deal with the storming. We all remind ourselves we stick together and we're family. We're all family, you know. So

Pamela  1:16:04
I like, so I when you guys, when you guys brought in Northwest cooperative development and Indian land tenure and inter tribal ag Council, how did you choose to work with them? Like, how did you choose to work with Diane?

Cheryl  1:16:22
Well, actually, I got a grant from the socially disadvantaged grant from the Rural Business Development Center USDA. It's the first grant I wrote, wow. And the contract person told me about Diane. And so he set up a meeting, and she was coming to meet with him. So we met here in Madras, and we got to talking, and I, you know, told her what we wanted to do. I had to tell her who we are and what we are. And so we had her come out and even tour the land, and so that she could have a idea of, you know, what, what we were wanting to do. So the first thing we had to do was put our articles together and put our bylaws together. And so she helped us through that by facilitating the group, you know, and bringing all the ideas together and all of that stuff. And once we got that done, and then I just sent them to the state of Oregon. I mean, I know how to set up LLC. It's the same and I knew how to set up the nonprofit. So the co op in Oregon, it's just a little different, but still the same.

Pamela  1:17:47
Okay, they have cooperative law in Oregon, don't they?

Cheryl  1:17:51
Yeah, yeah, they do. It's really complicated, yeah, and and the IRS, you have to look at that too. It says that a farming, farming cooperative doesn't have to pay taxes, but you have to really understand that the idea is any money that comes in, you distribute it back out, and your patrons pay the taxes. Okay, yeah, wow, taxes. Everybody has to pay taxes, and that's so important for everybody to understand when you're doing business through your co op.

Pamela  1:18:28
So how would you describe your experience working with these supportive organizations like Diane, Indian land tenure, inter tribal ag Council, how? How would you, what was your experience like working with them?

Cheryl  1:18:45
Oh, I love them all, okay, but I knew them all before, before we even started doing what we were doing, okay?

Pamela  1:18:56
Cuz I know Catherine talked about you from, you know, when we had that shared call that one time, and she just, she just kept talking about the regenerative grazing that you were doing and how you were healing the land, and how important that was. Was was Catherine? Was she your, your rep for intertribal AG,

Cheryl  1:19:19
well, she is now, but how I met, how I met her, was through my husband. We were at the Affiliated Tribes conference, and I, I was a committee chair, so I had to do this. So I asked my husband, I says, Can you attend this other meeting? It had to do with land. And you attend this other meeting for me. And he goes, Well, how much you going to pay me? So I always had to give him gambling money. You know, most of the time we were at the tribal Casino and Resort. And so anyway, he goes to that meeting and I. He comes back, so impressed about this woman, and he says, You have got to meet this woman. Oh, okay. I said, Well, what's her name? And so he went and got her phone number and name and where she was from, and I called her, and that's how we met. And I told her, you know about who we are. She had never heard of public domain allotments. Yeah,

Pamela  1:20:25
well, I know it's like, boy, I thought, I thought I knew everything, and when I that's been quite an education. I mean, learning about public domain allotments. They're all across the United States. I had no idea just and in Alaska, I could see Alaska that being up in Alaska more than down in the US, but I just, I don't know that that was really interesting. So when you guys what brought like, what brought everybody together to form the cooperative and, and I think you've answered that up above, because you, really, you guys wanted to do this. And I don't want to tell you, but it what would the answer be, that you guys came together for economic development? Well,

Cheryl  1:21:13
when we got the grant money from the socially disadvantaged group, grants data enabled us to hold our meetings and pay for travel because, like our president, lives in Fort Dushane, you know, he's a tribal member of the Reno Sparks Indian colony, but his wife is a ute, and they live out there on that reservation out there in Utah. Wow. And so then we have our other one. He's a Muckleshoot tribal member, and he's up in Washington. So, you know, so we had we that money was so important for us to fund their travel. Our other board member was that it lives down in San Jose to California. That's down there by LA. Wow. You know so our tribal people, people, our board members, like you say we're like I said, we're a virtual organization, but it's important for us to have the money to fund participation, yeah, and when we started doing that, and then we had Diane come in and buy lunch for everybody, because you don't want them to leave when you're in these meetings. So you gotta feed them. And then the Indian lantern foundation paid for the meeting places. And at one time, Catherine, we met out at Umatilla at their museum where her office was. And so we really, you know, strategize, saved resources, but we got together, and we did really good, until COVID hit. Then it became zoom, yeah, but you can't replace in Indian country, we're huggy people. We're face to face people. This zoom just, it's just doesn't work for us. Half the time they can't work their cellphone half the time their internet doesn't work, or their WiFi, or I just get really frustrated in working with remote rural communities. Yeah, on Zoom, see down.

Pamela  1:23:40
It's bad broadband connectivity in our worst in the country for that. And it is hard, you know, I when you guys moved from your original startup group to the cooperative, kind of, What process did you move to? Kind of move that, you know, kind of your original startup group into the

Cheryl  1:24:01
co op. How did that happen? Oh, well, this steering committee, they went into executive session and elected the board for the co op before we even had our articles and and our bylaws. Okay? So we got our board members so that we can have, you know somebody speaking for the Co Op, somebody giving me instructions on what we needed to do.

Pamela  1:24:35
So when you think about the original vision for the Co Op, how did you nourish that vision.

Cheryl  1:24:43
Well, the the vision for the co op is that we formed it so we could speak with one voice and work together. And then we had some values, like, you know, restrict, respect each other, trust each other, blah, blah, blah. It's all in it's all in my PowerPoint. Presentations. So I said I could do the PowerPoint presentation and make it really easy.

Pamela  1:25:06
No, that's okay. I Okay. Well, we'll talk about this tomorrow. You know, because I, I feel like I think there's a different way. Um, all right, you chose the you chose to form a cooperative, or you saw that as a good thing for the community. How did you explain it to others? How did you get them to kind of catch that vision?

Cheryl  1:25:30
Well, one thing I did was, USDA has a nice PDF file on co ops, and Diane is really good at explaining, you know, and so in a lot of our our meetings, we she was there to answer questions and explain, but I would give, I would send out information to the board members. I didn't send it out to the to the allotees, just the board members, because we didn't have any members at that time, and we didn't, you know, we don't have staff, so I didn't have resources to send out to 30, yeah, you know, landowners and and that, you know, they empowered The Co Op to do business on their behalf. That's why it was so important to have it.

Pamela  1:26:30
So did you see differences between your cooperatives and others that you may know of? Oh, differences. Oh yeah,

Cheryl  1:26:41
for example, well, Harney, in Harney County, the electric companies are all co ops, okay? And then you have these farm co ops. You have, I mean, you can put together a co op for just about anything you want, but however, ours is a native Co Op, and it's we own land. Most of those co ops don't own land. You know, and we own land, and our co op leases our land. Our Co Op has first right in the bidding for our land. We made sure that all of that is in place the regulations in the 25 CFR, you know, for trust land. So when

Pamela  1:27:41
you talk about you get first, right? That's like, if somebody wants to sell the land, you guys get first rights to purchase it. If they decide to not keep their allotment. Can they do that?

Cheryl  1:27:51
Well, that gets kind of technical, because to sell an allotment, you have to have 100% ownership, okay, permission, okay, you know, but to lease it, you just have to have the majority. So that has to do with dealing with the Fractionation, and that's why we have the co op. We don't have to do with all of that.

Pamela  1:28:15
So I've got another let's see. See these questions have all been answered. Okay, do you utilize a website or social media for marketing your cooperative? Do you guys have your co do you have your website up yet? It's not live, but we're designing it. Okay, so it's it's in progress. Yes, will you guys? Will you be using social media, like Twitter, Instagram?

Cheryl  1:28:47
Are you kidding? We don't want to get bogged down with all of that stuff. I can't hardly handle Facebook.

Pamela  1:28:53
Well, you got to let one of those young people take care of that for Yeah, I know we'll have people following you from all over the world.

Cheryl  1:29:01
Well, I do have, I do have a new latte up on Facebook, but I never responded anything. So no, well, maybe if I could find a young person who wants to be the what do they? Call them some webmaster

Pamela  1:29:17
or whatever. Yeah, like, I have a young guy. He's, he's my social media strategist. He left for a while, and he came back. Oh my gosh. I just feel like, okay, I must have done something good this year that he's back, you know, like, because, oh my gosh, I just had to let everything just lay there, because I can't fix it. And, you know, there was a day last week, if I would have owned a gun, I would have shot my computer. I was just like, so over it. You know, with the technology, it's like, I can't take this anymore. Let me ask you this, how do you address management issues, and do you have do you Well, see, you've already answered this. Do you have non member management? Staff is manager? Is management, volunteer, paid or combination, combination,

Cheryl  1:30:10
I'm the management, I'm the project manager, and it's combination. I do a lot of pro bono work. I mean, that's my giving back as a landowner, but, yeah, I also contract under my I contract under my consulting business for the to provide technical assistance to the co op and numu allottee Association.

Pamela  1:30:38
Okay, I think I have one more question. Do you have an employee handbook? A what an employee handbook?

Cheryl  1:30:49
Oh, we don't need one yet, but I have, I have one drafted Okay, I have a lot of drafted stuff policies, all that stuff. Okay, we're just not ready for it yet.

Pamela  1:31:00
Yeah, see, this question wouldn't even apply to you, so I'm not even going to ask it. So I we're done, man, oh, man, I'm gonna have to send you some goodies. You really thank you for being the first one. Oh, okay, you're the first one. I'm really excited. So thank you so much for being the first person to do this, and being the brave woman that you are, and you know, a kind of our you're our trial person for this. And so we'll have stuff to talk about tomorrow at the meeting, and I want to have a question. Well, if I could say something, Cheryl, this has been a total delight to meet you and to listen to your story, and just all the creative ways that you you know, the way you've been able to pull people together and resources together, and clearly, you know, you were the spark that made all this happen. But it's, it's, it's wonderful to hear your story, but also, you know, the just to get the sense of, sort of what the mission is behind it, and that's to return the land to its original its original form. And one of the things that I loved was what you talked about with the cattle, that how you rotate the cattle and they regenerate the land, because they understand the land,

Cheryl  1:32:30
right? But we think buffalo would do it better. They would. They would. They're easier on the land.

Pamela  1:32:40
But I mean even making $4,000 in 20 days. I mean, holy buckets, you'd have to be leasing that land for at least 1012, years before you'd make $4,000

Cheryl  1:32:55
I know it.

Pamela  1:32:58
Oh, Cheryl, thank you so much. Now, Sandy, is there anything follow up with as far as, like, when she'll be getting her information?

Sandy McMahon  1:33:10
How do you mean the information? Well,

Pamela  1:33:13
kind of like we promised everyone that they'll get information back about their interview, and they'll get something from us with regards to what we learned again, without disclosing anyone's names.

Sandy McMahon  1:33:28
Understood. Well, this is the first, and as we, as we do more cooperatives and stuff, that's when the sharing, you know, the what are we learning this common and things like this, my guess is the the rest of this grant, it we have about six months left, six to seven months left for the formal grant. And I might, my hope is that we'll be able to finish things in that time frame, so by that, you know to get, to get sort of what we have understood and learn from this. And Cheryl, this is a trial process for us. Okay, you are helping us to learn the process that we're going to be used using. We want to follow the current grant with about a five year grant and then start working with a much larger group of cooperatives and share that. But I would say that probably in the next six to seven months, we will have enough stuff together to be able to do that. If you would like a copy of the transcript of this, we can certainly provide that for you, but that's just telling you what you said. So my guess is you already know that.

Cheryl  1:34:33
You know one thing that caught my attention as that your grant has to deal with Canada. Well, yeah, Canada and US, and I just think it's so I think that, because our allotment is public domain, allotments are not under the jurisdiction of a tribe, our model might fit really good with the First Nation people up there in their land.

Pamela  1:34:59
Yeah. So part of what, what inspired all this was an observation that we learned as we were writing the grant, you know, Canada, from a Native American as well, or let's see, in that case, tribal First Nations concept and and the general Canadian population is 1/10 of the population the United States. And that is true for the First Nations versus the number of the number of, you know, tribal members and Native Americans there are in the United States, yet they have 125 active cooperatives up there, travel cooperatives in the United States. We can track about 23 to 25 and the question is a big question for us, and what we want to start being able to theorize from this is, why does this this? This way of doing things seem to work better in Canada and then in the United States, and what can we learn from that? So as we put all that together, that information together, and we will have initial findings that we will be developing over the next six months, we would be delighted to share that with you. That answer your question. Pamela,

Cheryl  1:36:08
yes, are you? Are you saying the cooperative stuff in Canada work better than the ones in the lower 48 or five times as many of them? Oh, well, that doesn't like I said before you know, you can have as many. You can have as many as you want. I mean, you can do Cooper. You can do like at the Colville reservation they, they did put cooperatives to study their computer system. You put a cooperative together to to do, I don't know your traditional foods, you know, and we put our cooperative together for our land, right to me, to me, the land, that cooperative can encompass all kinds of things related to the land. Yeah. Well,

Pamela  1:37:01
you're making a very important point, and I think that see part of it in the United States, the way we count cooperatives, is those who are registered with states. And so one of the questions that comes is, look, this is a pretty natural way that a lot of tribes do things anyway, and they actually do many more of these things. They just don't bother to register with the states, because why deal with them?

Cheryl  1:37:25
You know? Well, you know, the the feedback that I've got because we did a project with an allotment down on my reservation, that is on the Indian Reservation, and the and then when we went up to show ban. The landowners didn't want to, because the tribe can enact a LLC or a co op if they want. But they didn't want to do that. They wanted to do it under the state, because they're, you know, that you're more independent under the state, yet you have a stable, you know, like here in Oregon, we deal with the Attorney General's office. You know, I have to do reports to the Attorney General's Office on our financial condition, and we have to pay these fees. And we, you know, our CPA has to certify this so, but to me, when you do that, you have a lot of credibility. When it comes to you know, you walk into a bank and say, I need to get a loan for my we're cooperative. I I need to get a loan. Well, you have to give them something that you know is going to convince them that you deserve that money, and the way we've deserved designed ours, we can do that. Yep,

Sandy McMahon  1:38:47
no, and you're making a very, very good point. So that is one of the things that we hope to understand and stand I said, like I said, this is sort of a preliminary study to figure out how to go about collecting this information and respecting the respect and being respectful of the individuals we're working with, which is why we de identify things when we when we do things, you know, when we put together information, but what we also want to do. And I think this is where Pamela comes in. Pamela is not in city. Is sort of an odd college, because we are a federal agency, so we're part of BIA and part of Bie, right, right? That ties a lot of strings around us. Pamela doesn't have those strings tying her. So what Pamela can get out of this is come part of this will be a story that we can tell you know about what your cooperative is and how it form and how it's different. That is then storytelling. And then Pamela has the capacity, because she is not federal and she's Minnesota indigenous Business Association, she can put these stories together. There and then share them. But again, we would only do that with your permission, as we said in the beginning. So if we get to that point, as we get to that point, then we'll be in touch with you there. Yeah.

Cheryl  1:40:11
Well, good luck. You. Information overload. This is very complex and comprehensive.

Sandy McMahon  1:40:18
Well, I really, I really appreciate the capacities, you know, that unique combination of capacities that you have that really got this thing off the ground, yeah,

Cheryl  1:40:29
oh, well, it's 28 years of federal service. I'm an ex fed and and I do have a master's in management, undergrad and organizational communication. So it's, I've learned a lot through the education, but also, you know, life experience, actually, I should have a PhD. I've been thinking, well, how come I'm doing all this stuff and I should have a PhD? Yeah, I'm getting too old. I'm getting too old.

Pamela  1:41:04
You could do your, your thesis could be written on enumu deep,

Cheryl  1:41:08
right? I could just give, hey, I could just give them my USBs, huh? All four of all sorts of references to get some students to put it together for me. Hello, students.

Pamela  1:41:27
Well, Cheryl, again, thank you so much for your time, and it's just a pleasure to see you again. I just I always learn something new every time I talk with you. So thank you so much.

Cheryl  1:41:39
Well, good. I'm glad you're learning and retaining it. Then you pass it

Pamela  1:41:44
on. I'm trying. I'm trying. I tell everybody about you. So thank you so much. And Amy and Quinn, thank you both for being here. Yes, it was nice. Better unmute and say goodbye. Thank you. Thank you. Goodbye. If

Sandy McMahon  1:42:01
you can hang on for just a bit, I'd like to talk to you just just a moment. Very, very I'm

Pamela  1:42:06
gonna, I'm gonna sign off. Thank you. Goodbye. Hey, Sandy, yeah, that business is.


