Earth and Sky Floral Designs
Shayai Lucero of Pueblos of Acoma and Laguna 
Matriarch/Floral Designer
Interviewer: Jodi Burshia (10/11/2025)

Interviewer: Well, good afternoon. My name is Jodi Burshia. So my first question, is what is your role or position in the organization?

Shayai Lucero: Ok, my name is Shayai Lucero. I am from the Pueblos of Acoma and Laguna.
I am the Matriarch and Floral Designer at Earth and Sky Floral Designs, I chose the term “Matriarch,” instead of Owner or President, because for me, like, president means you're responsible for certain things within a company or a business but as owner, you take ownership of everything, but for me, as matriarch, that means that not only am I taking care of
my business affairs, and I'm responsible for them, but that also means that I'm taking care of the community, so I chose to use the term matriarch instead of other two descriptive words
for a company owner, or president, or CEO, all those different terms. So just a little bit of indigenizing and take ownership and, yeah, I’m taking responsibility for my business.

Interviewer:  That's wonderful. That's great. That's really important that,  that people know that, you know that people are working with your business, and that's why, you know that's your particular role, that's awesome. So, where is your, organization located?

Shayai Lucero: We are located, and have always been located, on the Pueblo of Laguna Reservation. And that in itself has, had some pros and cons to it. And it allows me to be directly,  to live and to work directly in the community and work with people, and be able to serve Acoma, parts of Navajo, and then the land-grant communities that surround us. And but, you know to be present in the community, I think it's really important, and as a business owner to be 
kind of have an idea of what our life is like. But then,  the cons to it is that the distance from the bigger cities, access to fresh products, like today, got a funeral for tomorrow. The family wanted some of the flowers today, and I told them my semi-flower delivery has not arrived yet, it won't be here till this afternoon, and so,  it's just whereas, like, in the city, I could have said, yeah,  run down the street, grab what I needed at the wholesaler, come back to the shop, and then create what I needed to, and have it done. But now, I'm at the mercy of the delivery drivers, on their way from the wholesaler, and so it's like there's pros and cons, and then also access to capital living and, being on the reservation when you're trying to access capital.  A lot of these traditional companies do not understand, the federal status of being on the reservation, so there's some pros and cons, but for me, it's mainly the pros, and to be able to live and serve in my own community, is really important.

Interviewer:  Absolutely. Thank you for sharing that. Do you feel like you need to, explain, like, the federal status? Like, the sovereign status? Two different organizations? How does that work?

Shayai Lucero: It's been a battle for, since before I even took ownership of the business. 
because, the house that I live in, I've owned since I was 17 years old, but because it is on a foundation it's not considered true real estate, because it's a foundation home, and 
even though I do own the house, I don't own the land that it sits on because of the Federal Trust status. And so traditional loan companies, banks, even some of these CFDIs and other nonprofit organizations that provide loans or grants to businesses don't quite understand that. I had a bank tell me, well, if you lived in a trailer or a modular home, if you didn't pay your loan, we could actually, pick it up and physically remove it from where it was located, so they could take it from you. and because it was on foundation, I couldn't do that. So somebody with a trailer or a modular home had more collateral, access to collateral, or could use their home as collateral than I could, even though, my home was more structurally sound than one of those other two types of homes. And so,  constantly trying to explain that, through the years, anywhere from these different companies to even, federal government, organizations. Like, I would’ve been fighting with SBA (Small Business Administration) for many, many years. Regarding that, because even when I, was looking to be to get an SBA loan, I still couldn't use my home as collateral. So maybe that's some good things, good things in it. Yeah, so I don't have to worry about it, being,  taken away from me.

Interviewer: Absolutely. That's you think, some people are aware of, like, how those things work. Some people aren't, and so it's, like, that entire, component of, like, bringing some education to this, to these different scenarios. Shayai Lucero: Uh Huh. Interviewer: Hear that. Yes, totally hear that.

Shayai Lucero: Yeah, it is, it's, like I said, it's educating, a lot of, companies about what's going on. And then during the pandemic, that was another thing, trying to explain to people, to organizations, to different groups that were offering grants for entrepreneurship. And one, go forage outside for plants, to create. I'm like, well most of this stuff is, we're high desert, even if you put them in water, they're not gonna last, because, they're more acclimated and they have long tap roots. I mean, you can get to, like, the scientific,  basis of trying to forage plants in a high desert area for, for floral designing, it's just not going to work because you need a constant water source, or moisture levels. But then,  and then people would say, well,  have it shipped in, and then during the pandemic, some of our borders were closed. And there was one point during that we couldn't even leave the yards of our homes, because the tribe was trying to protect their people. And so we had to abide by certain rules, and people just could not understand, they're like, well, just break the rules. I'm like, I ain't breaking the rules. It was a lot of education. It's always been a lot of education. So you have to be patient. You really have to be patient. You can't, you can't just,  sometimes I'll just, like, okay, let me do this again,  and then, and then, and then start it, and start the education, by talking with different groups.

Interviewer: Right. There's always that component. It's very true, you're right.
What inspired you to start this? Like, with other community members, or how did you, Please tell us.

Shayai Lucero: Well, in 2008, I finally, received my Bachelor of Science degree in Biology with a minor in Chemistry, and about 5 years prior, I had actually finally the whole process, resolved a legal matter with our tribal scholarship, and I was able to return back to school. And my goal was to become a doctor, a white MD (referring to doctor’s white gown?) and serve our community. But then, when I finally had the legal issues remedied, and was ready to go back to school, I found out I was pregnant. At that point, I knew that medical school was out of the question because I didn't want to raise a child while going to medical school. I've had friends do it, and they lost out so much on their children. And I just didn’t want to miss any of my child’s life. I know being a doctor would, be important for the community. The child that I was raising, to me, was more important at that point. So I went back to school, and I actually got into more the environmental aspect, medicinal plants, in working with environmental programs. However, when it came time to applying for a job when I graduated, I had a 6-month-old daughter, and she was breastfeeding, and the jobs that I was applying to, they weren't accommodating to a breastfeeding mother. And, you can only pump at these times, it was very, like, regimented, or they just didn't accommodate breastfeeding. And so it took a long time, and it was really hard for my baby to finally get established, to breastfeed in, and I didn't want to, risk losing that type of nourishment for them. So, the word in the community came out that there was a business for sale. The local florist was selling her shop, and I'm like, okay, how hard can this be? Just really naive, and I'm like, I can own a business, I can run a business, and take my baby to work, and it's been the craziest, craziest thing I've ever done. But it's the longest job I've ever had, too. And so, but I love what I do, and when I initially bought the business, it came with a floral designer. So, I had a floral designer, she went to floral school, she's professionally certified. And so she took care of, like, the floral designing. I took care of the business and the marketing, purchasing, HR, even janitorial washing buckets, when you're a business owner, you do it all. But I was doing everything except floral designing. Then she got pregnant and, she's like, I'm gonna go on maternity leave, and I told her, no, you're not. And she goes, yes, I am, and so it was a crash. She goes, you're gonna have to learn how to design, you're gonna have to learn how to do it quickly. So it was a crash course in floral designing, wound up that I really liked it, and then turns out that I'm actually good at it. And, I’m the floral designer, in addition to everything, doing everything else. And she moved on, she works for me, for bigger events or holidays, but that's, that's about it. She's like, grasshopper, she's like, you’re doing better than I have, I ever could. That's how I became a floral designer, too. 

Interviewer:  That's wonderful! So you saw this need in the community, and you just, like, stepped in there, you're like, I'm gonna do this. Do you want to, expand upon that on, like, the needs in the community that you, like, that you're fulfilling?

Shayai Lucero: Our Pueblo people, we have a really big affinity for flowers, because we see flowers are what attracts our pollinators. The bees, the hummingbirds, dragonflies, bats, that's what attracts, the pollinators, and which is how our crops grow. And so, you'll see a lot of floral imagery in our pottery, even in our regalia, even ceremonial clothing. Flowers are important to our people. So, for me, what I'm doing is an extension of that, but it's also providing a service to the community in times of need, or various occasions, and whether the occasion is happy or sad, I'm there to provide that service to them, to help people celebrate all aspects of life. For sympathy arrangements, I don't think of them as sad. I think of them as life tributes. I’m kind of known for the floral life tributes. I've had many natives, not only Pueblo, but Navajo and Apache people come to me because, I hear a lot from these two main communities is that funeral homes don't understand what we need. Funeral homes don't understand our traditional protocols, when it comes to death, or when it comes to putting someone to rest in the ground. And so I do get a lot of Navajo requests, because they see me that I don't take a sympathy design as, something taboo, or something dark. And for me, when I bring the flowers in, I always welcome them, and I say, welcome to Laguna, from wherever they came from, and then I'll talk to the flowers and tell them, this is what you're going to be doing. And so, really try to keep a good head, good mindset while working on the floral life tributes, as well as all the other designs and just to be able to provide that type of service to the community has been basically the number one reason why I have not closed my business. And there's been times where it's been really difficult, there's negative balance in the bank, and I'm struggling to figure out how I'm gonna pay the next bill, and I'm like, well, I should just quit and get a real job, but then I think about, like, wow, what would our community do? And so I realized that how important it is for me to be there for the community. And in Pueblo, when it comes to Pueblo funerals, most often when someone starts journeys, their burial is usually within 24 to 48 hours. And so, a lot of regular florists do not know how to accommodate a quick request like that, and so I tell people I'm like a florist on call. People usually will get ahold of me right away, if somebody has journeyed, and say, well, the wake's tomorrow. It's like, okay, well, then rearrange schedule. And my family has now, after 16 plus years, I'm like, I have a funeral tomorrow, and so we all work on adjusting schedules, so that I can go get flowers, and then have the flowers ready for whenever they get to, by the time the wake occurs. When I have florists call me from out of state, or even from Albuquerque, or like, a florist-to-florist order they're very surprised that I'm like, well, I can, this is what I have in the cooler right now, and this is what I can accommodate you with. So, most of the time, it's designer's choice, when it comes to designs like that. I always tell people, okay, you can give me your color request, but flower requests, I can't always accommodate you on that, so we do that. 
But then I also look at budgets, the communities that I serve, they're low to middle-income families, so I have to have price points that are accommodating to all types of budgets, and even if you have a low budget design, you deserve high quality, and so I always try to make sure that
everything is high quality at whatever price level, price point you're wanting. Because again, that's really important for any design, any floral design.

Interviewer: Absolutely. Wow, that was just, I love learning, and you really have, like brought it. You're just like, I'm bringing some information and some education, so thank you, thank you so much. It's just it's really important to be thinking about all these different components, and, like, how that's representative, and how you've, like, you're bringing all that knowledge into this particular work. That's great. Do you feel like your work and your shop is reinforcing cultural values or things that are happening in the community?

Shayai Lucero: I do, I said, I grew up with, very traditional grandparents and parents and, who had high moral standards and values. There's been times when I've been wanting, [or] had the urge to cut corners, or to maybe not be so honest. It bothers me to no end because I always think about what's going to… I may not face the consequences now, but what if I have to face them when I see creators? So, part of that was, I don't know if you've seen my TED talk. I talk about, like, marks on your hands. It was a lesson my paternal grandfather had given me, and he said, everything you do will leave a mark on your hands. If you do anything bad, it’ll leave a mark, even though you can't see it. And when you go see Creator, Creator's gonna ask, let me see your hands, and that's gonna tell you what kind of life you lived. And for me, I want to go with as few marks on my hands, as possible. And so, I kept those lessons in my head when it comes to running the business. Like I said, there's times where there's been a negative balance in the bank. And I'm like, well, I could do something, maybe not so legal, or figure out… and it just eats at me. So, I make sure that that’s part of our company values. Anybody who hires, I tell them, you’re gonna come into a company that's really honest, that's straightforward, won’t shortchange you. You will be taken care of, but in return, I hope that you can give loyalty and respect and do follow those, standards, morals, values, and standards. And it's just basically, like, our Pueblo teachings, try to lead a good life, and so I tried to expand it. That's probably why I'm not rich. Yeah, it's probably why I'm not money rich. I'm rich in terms of wealth in a different type of sense. My child's teacher, Mr. Arlen John at NACA (Native American Community Academy), at Open House, we were talking about, he’s going to be doing a new class this year with the high school students on different Indigenous methodologies, pedagogies, and teachings, and he said, the wants to talk about generational wealth, and he says it's so different in Indigenous communities about generational wealth versus a non-Native community, where they look at it as, like bank accounts, how many material items. But he says, in our Indigenous communities, wealth is the traditional knowledge you hold. Do you know the songs for this ceremony? Do you know he, he looked at me, he says, you know the plant medicine. He says, you have 30 years. He says, your family's wealthy. 

I look at my business as being, successful from an Indigenous point of view, but, not very successful in a non-native world. But I've been able to, teach others, again, there's that education process about why I'm still successful, why I'm still here after 16 plus years, and it's not just me serving the community, it's like the community realizing that they have a service here that, is needed, and that I can fulfill it. And, so it's just, it's really trying, I don't even remember what you said, but your initial question was, but it's like, again, trying to be trying to teach entrepreneurs about different types of wealth, and it's not always, related to financial aspect.

Interviewer: Absolutely. Thank you so much for sharing that. I think,  definitely, like, the ideas of, like, wealth, what is considered wealth, is definitely not just one version of, like what that is, and just, like, it's a very westernized version of, like, what's considered wealth, and so I'm really it's just amazing that you're, bringing that out, that more and more people are learning about that There's non-Western ways there's Indigenous ways of, like, of administering wealth and that's really important. Do you feel like, the people are learning about this through your organization or through your business? That they're learning about different forms of  generational wealth?

Shayai Lucero: Yeah, I think so, and that's one aspect that I've been, really trying to share, and to educate others with, I think it was maybe about 7, 8 years ago. I know I have this knowledge of medicinal plant use and I've been studying it since I was 13 years old, and at one point, I don't know if it was a dream, or maybe just really in my head, but I kept thinking about, why am I hoarding this knowledge? And not sharing it, and it was like, what if I go ask Creator? What if I go to Creator and they tell me, why did you not share it?  What use of it, is it for us up here? We're always going to be healthy when you go to Creator.

The story is you go back, you're healthy, you return to be healthy state if you were ill here. And there's no use for it up here. So then, at that point, my mom and I were really talking about it, and we're like, we need to start sharing the wealth. In, not hoarded in a bank account. 

And so, we started doing more medicinal plant presentations. Talking about, just the general uses of some of the plants, that people see in the fields, or people will see growing, and talking to them about it. More of a general term, not necessarily, I'm gonna take on an apprentice and really teach them, The real deeper meaning of the medicinal plants, but it was really important for us to be to be able to share that wealth and that knowledge. And then, when it comes to floral designing, you'll see in a lot of social media groups, you'll get new individuals, who are, brand new to forestry, asking about the mechanics of a design. And for me, my mentor, he never held back on how to do a design. If I saw something he did, he would say, okay, this is what you did, this is what you need to do, these are the items you need, and he always shared that. 
For me being a floral designer for 10 plus years, to be able to go back and tell a new floral designer, you might want to try this, or you, look at it this way. It's, again, that sharing of wealth. For me, that's really, really important, because what use of it is it for me when it's all in here, and I'm hoarding it, it’s not helping anybody else. So, just to be able to be that makes me feel good about what I'm doing.

Interviewer: Absolutely. Most definitely. Was this part of your original vision, or was this something that was developed along the years? Or, how would you like, this idea of, generational wealth? Was, like, the process of imparting it part of something that you.

Shayai Lucero: I think it was just growing up, yeah, growing up I think, being in science, and being in the science field, when you're doing an innovative or brand new research, or you're doing something well. You're almost secretive about what your research is on because there are so many thieves, in terms of, my dad would call them, vampires, who want to extract from you all the time. And so you see, like, all these different, intelligence vampires is what he would call them, stealing your knowledge, stealing what, and then passing it off as their own. So, in science, that happens all the time, and I think that was one of the mindsets I had to break through from being, from this scientific background.

I mean, I did science fair projects in high school, did research, I did lab work in college, helped professors with their own research, and you're sworn to, NDAs, and you're, have to sign all these different statements, and, but to go from that kind of mindset too.

I always tell people, if you ask me the right question, I will tell you the answer. But I'm not gonna go out and just, say, oh, this is what you should do. If you ask the question, it's just like going to your elder, in your community, and saying, well, how do you, why do I wrap my belt like that, when we're dressing in our regalia. And they're, more than likely will tell you why they, why you do that. So it's for me, it's taking that kind of, go ask, your elder aspect, in and share in how I share knowledge and provide information to others, but I'm just not gonna, like, butt in and say I'm the expert, and you have to listen to me, because then, in the end, that's not even good either. And so, its just, that’s kind of it was not my intent to have this part of my business, but I feel that whatever I share and somebody else can learn from me, then that's great. And if they, and if they can learn from my story, learn from what not to do as a small business owner,  because I do share my ups and downs, it's like, don't do this, you need to go and if they can learn from it, and they're more successful than I am, because that means they took whatever I went through, and they changed it so that, it helped them, then I'm fine. I'm good with that, yeah.

Interviewer: That's wonderful. That’s definitely, allowing the person to, like, work with the information than to run with it, which we want for everyone that we work with, and so that's just wonderful. Do you feel like, the people that work with you, like, are they, like, in a membership capacity, or is it a combination of that, like members and customers, and then community members, how would you define, like, some of that?

Shayai Lucero: Well,  like I said, when I first bought the business, it came with a floral designer. And I'll tell her, can you come work for me? I need help. And she'll change her schedule, and I think it's that loyalty to her. I've had a couple of students who worked with me for the summer youth program, through Acoma. And I've had to call on them, a couple of times, and say, hey, I am so overwhelmed with everything from washing buckets to processing, and will they come and help me. So just calling out to the community and asking for help has been really, really good. When I had a heart attack, 7 years ago? Gosh, is it 7 years ago! When I had a heart attack, I actually had a wedding that weekend. I was working on a wedding, and I reached out to my floral community, and four florists in Albuquerque said I can take over. I mean, it was just like,  they knew. People jumped in to help. But I think that is because I've really tried to be help the community. So when you, it is always said, if you help the community, it'll always come back to you when you need it. So it has come back. And right now, my employee base is my family. And then, of course, there's a couple of members in the community that will come in, for special occasions. But since I moved to the home studio, become a home studio (instead of) a storefront, I don't need, employees as much as I did with running a storefront. There's a big, big, big difference, so most of my employees are part-time, or, on occasion. Or seasonal, I should say, seasonal.

Interviewer:  Right, that makes sense. That makes complete sense. Thank you for sharing that. So, in terms of, like, getting the word out, do you feel like you utilize things like social media? How do you feel like you get the word out to people?

Shayai Lucero: Social media's a big player. Lately, I've been slacking, because with the weight of what's happening in our country. It's just been really hard for, for my own mental health to be on social media so much. And so for about 2 months, I've really slacked off on social media, and unfortunately, when you do that, your algorithms go down, and so it's trying to rebuild it after,  taking care of my mental health. It's like the fine line for me. I think it's mainly word of mouth, loyalty from past customers, people reaching out. I just did receive an order from an organization from California, and they wanted to send flowers to a museum director in Santa Fe. But they only wanted to use an indigenous florist, and they found me on social media, through my website. And so, they're, like really excited to be able to have somebody locally in the community, or a native, a native florist that would be willing to go to Santa Fe to deliver flowers. But it's hard. It's really hard. And then, also, it's hard to brag about myself, or brag about my flowers. I mean, I know I'm doing a great job creating these photo designs, but sometimes I feel like, I'm bragging about it too much. Because, (in) Pueblo ways, it’s always said, be humble.  So for me, that's where I have the most difficult time, announcing or, showcasing what I do, without making me feel uncomfortable to, like being too high and mighty on myself. Or, you know, there's imposter syndrome. and it's constant. It's hard. It's a hard fine line to be to be on social media, or to be to announce yourself. And, yeah, yeah. Even now, just talking about it, it's like yeah.


Interviewer: Right, completely understand that. You don't want to talk too much, and your work is important, but you're like, is this too much? Or, you know?

Shayai Lucero: Yeah, exactly. I'm sure you probably go through the same thing, you know? You're like, how much do I brag about myself and all that I'm doing, all these incredible things am I doing? And it's just like, Yeah. Or do I just let the work speak for itself, or, you know it’s hard.

Interviewer: It definitely gets interesting, you're right. So, how do you feel like you've, worked you know, speaking of that, and thinking about, roles and responsibilities, how do you engage the community, especially tribal leaders, and how do you keep that momentum going?

Shayai Lucero: How do I engage with the community? I think because I'm involved with, excuse me, various, organizations, like, I serve on the New Mexico Business Council, for the Small Business Majority, which is, our nonprofit organization in DC that advocates, for small businesses. And then, like, the American Heart Association of New Mexico, the NACA, Inspire Schools Network, and doing work with them on building their curriculum, their science curriculum. And then you know, there's just a lot of community service that I do, and I think, for me that helps, in terms of being able to educate about whatever, whatever topic I need to, to talk, to speak about. AISES, American Indian Science and Engineering Society. So, you know, just being involved with those community organizations helps me to be vocal, be advocate to, you know, to do justice work, in terms of working with an organization rather than me just, you know going into some space and just say, hey, I'm here. You know, you just don't do that. So, for me, like, it's really important for me to be involved in community work, and then to, to do a lot of the advocacy. And then that, in turn, will turn into media requests, and so, you know, just following that kind of pattern, and, just being able to educate somebody else, and, like, just recently, it was the Wall Street Journal, interviewed me regarding tariffs. And prior to that, I had spoken with, CBS News, and prior to that was The New York Times. But when I was talking with each reporter, each journalist, I told them it was CBS News and we were talking about how the impacts of tariffs are happening with small businesses. Particularly for the floral industry, because a lot of our product comes shipped in from our southern relatives, Ecuador, Colombia. And they were astonished like, “oh, we didn't know that” I'm like, well, I'll just tell you that. And so, one friend of mine who follows, who reads all the news articles, he said, “why didn't they just read each other's articles, and they could have got all the same information?” And I said, well, you know, it's, like, different groups of people read these different, news articles. And so, for me, I was like, okay, I may sound repetitive to you, but, you know, for this new group of readers of the Wall Street Journal, they see it, they'll get a different perspective, like, oh, okay, so, it's just for me, I have to keep that in mind, too, that I may sound repetitive to, these different groups but it means that I'm reaching, a different, group of individuals who may not know, whatever I'm talking about, whatever subject I'm talking about, yeah.

Interviewer: Absolutely. That makes complete sense. And so, what do you tell, tribal leaders who know about how important your business is? But how do they work with, things, especially as things are changing? How do you connect with tribal leaders?

Shayai Lucero: Well, Acoma has been really good. Their Acoma Development Office has been really good in seeking me out in terms of advice, because I did have, for a short time, a storefront at Acoma, and then a storefront here in Laguna. So, the Acoma Business Development Office has been really good in terms of asking what do you think small business owners need? To be able to work with them has been really good. Laguna, not so much. You know sometimes I think they think I'm just complaining all the time, but, you know, they don't have a business development office, and a lot of what economic development is through LDC. And so our people have become kind of complacent and say, oh, well, LDC will take care of it because they're economic development, but not realizing that the small businesses are a part of it. I do, a lot of outreach in terms with the Small Business Council, in terms of making sure, like, our Native American business issues are heard. So, that means, you know, going to congressional leaders, and then the congressional leaders, I’ve heard from other tribal leaders say, “oh, we heard your name was, mentioned by, you know, insert congressional leader, when you, you visited them, or when you connected with them.” And so, you know, and so then they'll start reaching out, but you know, to work with tribal communities, that can be really hard, especially if you're not from that community. And so, for me, it's just being cognizant and respectful of the protocol, and it was really important, especially during the pandemic. People would call me and ask for, you know, flowers, because I was the go-between between families that, you know, couldn't mourn somebody, maybe who passed from COVID. And then I was the go-between between the family and then the person's funeral. And so, I was getting calls from people from all over New Mexico, asking me, you know, my family member in San Felipe passed away, can you send flowers to them? None of the other florists wants to. And so it was, like, connecting with their emergency operations and saying, what are your protocols in terms of delivering to your community for this funeral? Are you allowing outside deliveries? Are you allowing this? And again, it goes back to when I worked at AIPC [All Indian Pueblo Council], to learning about the way these different tribes are run. Because each tribal government is run differently. So, you can't compare Laguna to Acoma. You know, Laguna has a constitution, Acoma doesn't, you know, in terms of, like, their appointments of their tribal leaders. And then you look at, you know, you look at other, different tribes like Santa Domingo, they don't have a non-native court system. They have a traditional court system versus, you know, some of the others. So, a lot of those nuances of each of the tribes. Thankfully, I learned, when I was at AIPC, because that has helped me in terms of working with other tribal communities. Like I said, again, that really helped, knowing that type of protocol, and how each tribe was run helped a lot during the pandemic. And then even working with Navajo, you know, the different chapters, the different, you know, because you have To’Hajiilee, you have the Crown Point, the eastern side, and then when you get towards, you know, Gallup, which is more central, you know, it's like, how do you know, having to work with all these different, aspects of tribes not many people know how to do, so I think that really helped me in terms of working with tribal communities.

Interviewer: Absolutely. That's really important. Thank you for sharing that. It's just so many people, even if they've lived in New Mexico, if they're not from these communities, they're not aware of how that works. [Shayai – Un Huh.] Different, tribes operate in, especially as we're, like, working within AI, you know, there's grabbing information, whether or not it's correct or not. [Shayai – Yes.]They’re just grabbing it because it has Native American on there or something, you know. But it's different you know, AI doesn't make a make a difference for that, or it does make a difference?

Shayai Lucero: I don't know if you're in, one of the Facebook groups, but the AI bot, I don't remember which one it is, the AI bot will put up, these questions, like, what is the best Pueblo song to dance to, or whatever? And it cracks me up, because it's our community is just like, oh, Neon Moon by Brooks and Dunn, and so they're just giving the AI, all this, like, wrong information to try to protect our traditional information. And I think about how historically we've done that when the settlers have come in. We've done that type of education to these entities that we're just extracting. Like Elsie Clews Parsons, you know, who came in, you know, they would tell they would tell the people, just tell her whatever, you know, just tell her anything. And then she thought that was, like, the truth, and, you know, it was just to try to protect, like, protect our community. So, for me, whenever I see the AI bot go up, and then all the people start saying all different kinds of funny things, then I'm like, oh, okay, that's, like historically, what we did was historically that's how we protected ourselves, and you know, with AI trying to come in and learn so much about us, it's like, well, how you know, I guess that's what we're gonna probably have to do to protect ourselves, protect our people. So that was just another side. Side note.

Interviewer: It's very true, like, that's why I wanted to talk with you directly about getting the actual and real information. You know, that's not told through an AI bot who's going out, trying to reach and grab for stuff. You get the real truth, you know, from you.

Shayai Lucero: Yep and that's important. That's really important. I think that's what a lot of our kids need to do, our youth and our communities need to teach, but we also need to teach our elders, like, this is what's happening, too. To you know, so that they don't fall victim into all of this, and like, I just learned from my kid, my child, Mai, was showing me a YouTube video about how you can spot, like, ChatGPT responses. And it was a video, and I was watching it, and I was like, yep, I can tell who's, who's using ChatGPT now and just all the different little things that the AI bot, they even have their own characters, characteristics, in their writing. Absolutely. But I learned something from my kid, yeah.

Interviewer: It's true. That's out, there's so much that is out there, so much incorrect information, and then for the students are part of this project, for them learning about, you know, how to take this information and to work with it , to extract, all of the, information, you know, which is really important, talking directly to the people. [Uh Huh.] But, like, why they're doing this, why they have, like, a particular business, how, like, their business is connecting with, like, the community, all of that. [Yeah.] It's really important. Because you've, answered many of these things, and so just as you were talking, you know, because I had some questions here about how you responded to COVID and you gave such a beautiful response to that you know how we work with global epidemics like that, and it's just, like, how do we work with that? Because this Indigenous knowledge is always there but people really respond to, like, okay, this is only way of doing things, if they look at a western way of doing things the right way of doing this, and it's like, no, no, no, this has been here all along, you just haven't seen it or worked with it. [Yeah.]

Shayai Lucero: Yeah, like, when it came to the pandemic, you know, my dad, he had end-stage renal failure. And, you know, again, being a scientist, studying virology, and knowing if this is a brand new illness and our bodies have not adapted to it yet. I already, I already knew it was going to be bad. There was gonna be a number of deaths. It was gonna be very historic, and. Because if you go look at my social media posts, I kept telling people, be careful, because viruses, they don't discriminate. They don't care what you look like, they don't care if you, you know, you are blonde and blue-eyed, or you're dark-skinned and have curly hair, or straight hair, they don't care what you look like. They don't care what religion you belong to, as long as you have some cells they have to invade, they'll be harmful. And you know, I kept saying this in the beginning, and I would tell my parents, it's like, we have to be careful, especially with my dad being ill, so we had to protect him from it. And so we took that, you know, again, that scientific knowledge and aspect of it, on how to, how our family would handle COVID, and people made fun of us because we actually quarantined earlier than normal. We kept social distance earlier than normal , and even our family members make fun of us, they're like, oh, you're taking it too far, and we're like, no, we're doing this, my mom would tell people, Shayai has a background in biology, she should know. So, you know, they, they use that science background, and so far, our family of 6 I'm the only one who caught COVID, and that was because I was in the hospital, and that was, you know, 3 years later. But everybody else, still hasn't caught COVID. They're unicorns still, because they took all those precautions. They believed in the vaccines. But also, you know, there was a point when my mom and I were talking, and we said, what if we don't have access to our prescription medicines? And we do get COVID? Well, what are we gonna do? And so we thought hard about it, and we started writing down the list of medicinal plants that we had direct access to. Because she and I study Coronadismo medicine, we didn't take into consideration any of the plants from the relatives of South. We had to really look at, like, the local plants, the plants that grew around us, that we could easily gather in the field, and so we did. We spent a couple days gathering medicine in the fields, just in case, you know, we didn't, you know, we didn't have access, because I told her there might be a point where we might not be able to go anywhere. And sure enough, we weren't, you know, we weren't able to go. We were restricted. We had curfews, borders were closed, you know, shopping was limited, and even access to our doctors was limited. And so again, you talked about, well, you know, everyone says this is, there's only one way. I think that as Natives, we've learned to realize, oh yeah, there is just, there is one way, but there's also other paths that we need to look at to see if that's, like, one of the, one of the ways to get around this barrier, because, I've always spent my life, I wish my life would be, like, straight and narrow, or straight, you know, straight path, but for me, it's been just, like, bumps and curves and, you know, boulders put in front of me, and if there's a boulder in front of me, do I climb it? Do I go around it? Do I dig under it? Do I blow it up? You know, it's having to think about things that happen to you, and then not get so frustrated and fester in that anger. So, it's, like, always trying to figure out how to get around it. And I guess that may be part of being, you know, a scientist. You know, you're doing research, you run into a barrier, like, oh, why is that not working? Why is, you know, because I remember doing work in my science fair project, and I was doing DNA analysis, and there was just one part where it was just, like, not working. I know there was a kink somewhere, there was a step I was missing, or there was something I was not doing right, and so had to, you know, tweak it. And so, I think that being a scientist has really helped me, also, in terms of life, because you know that that's not the end of your research. You have to figure out if it is the end of your research. then why? Why did that happen? You can't just, like, say, give up. It's like, oh, well, let me start, you know, let me go do something else. You can't just leave your research. You just, you know, even if you get to that barrier, you have to figure out why that happened, and then you have to say, okay, well, maybe if I tweak it a little bit, or maybe I do something different, then you can get over that barrier, but yeah. So, again, I think that science has really, and now thinking about it, it's like, yeah, being a nerd has actually been a good thing for me.

Interviewer: Absolutely, that's exciting, yes! You have so much knowledge. Intrigue to this, and then, like all of that. And so, with that, how do you anticipate because you know what's happened in the past, you know how you've grown and you've shifted, what do you anticipate for the future? What are your hopes for the future with this?

Shayai Lucero: I really do like doing the advocacy work. Just being an advocate, being vocal and talking for the people. So, I don't know, I've kind of played around with, running for public office, and I have my friends, we had that reason why we were in Durango was a reunion of some of my college buddies and I'm like, okay, I might run for public office, but I can't afford to pay you, and they were just laughing. But, you know they were, like, really excited about, you know, possibly running for public office, and that’s been an aspect, but I always wanted to make sure, like, my children were out of high school, before I even started, thinking about that aspect. So, my child's senior, so I may do that. 

Shayai Lucero: I don't know, I really do love designing flowers, and, so I've been doing more freelance work for other florists in Albuquerque, for the bigger events, because, you know, I don't get that many large events here on the rez, and so, so being able to do more freelance work and learning the mechanics, learning the aspects, learning on that, has been, has been really fun, and I worked at the florist this past weekend, and we did 3 weddings. Work for 3 weddings. And so, it was fun, because each, you know, each wedding was a different thing. You know, you could have the same type of flowers, but each design was different to accommodate the bride's vision, the couple's vision, and, so it was, yeah. I don't know. I really don't know. My husband says he's gonna retire, when our child is done with college, because they're gonna go to UNM. So, I don't know. We'll see what it's gonna be like. I really don't know. But again if something comes up, and it's different, then I'll try it. My parents, my mom's like, she goes, you’ve always done so much your entire life. And I said, well, you always told me that If an opportunity comes up to try it out, to apply for it. And they always told me not to think you know, em-me-e, which means, oh, that's “scary”, in Keres. They always told me not to think like that. And I think because I don't think like that, I'm like, oh, let's see, let's give it a shot. And I think that's why I've done all kinds of different things, not just one type of, one type of thing, yeah. So, we'll see. I don't plan on being em-me-e anytime soon. Yep, yeah. That's awesome. Yep, we'll see what comes up.

Interviewer: That's great. That's wonderful. Well, this is great, and you know, I'm really thankful for taking this time and for sharing all this information. I'm looking forward to our group members learning so much about what you're doing, and then the hopes for the future, and that they can learn to call on you, that they will know. Because people often, think about, like, well, which florist should I go to? And I'm like. I know an excellent florist, that she can do so many things, and you bring so much knowledge to it, so it's just wonderful. Was there anything that we didn't talk about today?

Shayai Lucero: No, for me, when you were just saying, I know an excellent florist, you know, I've been working with other, trying to connect with other Indigenous florists, like, there's a couple of them in Oklahoma, there's one in Minnesota. And a couple, in the PNW (Pacific Northwest) area, and you know, that have actually reached out to me and said, we've followed you, and we think it's great that you're adding, like, the Indigenous perspective to floral design. So, I mean, we're like a small, we're like a, you know, small percentage in the floral industry, but I think that to know that what I've done, just, I guess, like I say, by instinct, has actually been influential for other florists to say it's okay to do it this way. I think that I'm happy with that. I'm really happy with that, and to know that, you know, that there are florists out there who actually, you know, are respectful of our traditions, and so you know, I always tell people, call me, I'll help you find somebody who, you know, if I can't do it myself, I'll find somebody to help you. To do it, who will be respectful of, of, of your, of you and your vision and your culture, whatever culture you may be in. So, you know, I think that I wish more people were like that, yeah. I wish more people were like that, and were not so judgmental, about people. Yeah.

Interviewer: Absolutely. [speaks Native American Language]. Excuse me.
Thank you for taking your. [interrupted] I know, life is busy, and it's just like, you're doing so many amazing things, and so, thank you. [speaks Native American term].

Shayai Lucero: Thank you for asking me.

Interviewer: Absolutely! I will, share this with you, and we'll go from there. And if you have any further questions that you want to, share? You want to learn more about this project? Any part of it? We’ll definitely be transparent and share that. and the students are in the midst of their of their trimester. We don't get our new, like the trimester for SIPI doesn't start until, I think, the first or second week in September.

END OF INTERVIEW

