Interview with DM, RSF. Interviewer – Pamela Standing (PS). Also attending: Sandy McMahon, Amy Meak, Quinn Mathew. May 19, 2022

PS: SIPI or the Southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute, has been awarded a grant by the US Department of Agriculture and the National Institute for Food and Agriculture. The subject area is a comparative study of citizen native and First Nations-led cooperative development in both the US and Canada, and analysis of factors associated with the development, growth and challenges of those cooperatives. The goal of the proposed project is to better understand cooperatives within the traditional boundaries of native and First Nation land and the factors that contribute to the development and growth of these cooperatives or lack of it. Through the study, we seek to expand rural native business opportunities by again, by identifying factors associated with First Nation cooperative growth and sustainability in the US and Canada and sharing these with native nation leaders and their citizens in the US. And also, in Canada. The project has been approved by SIPI's Institutional Review Board; all the information gathered and analyzed will be de identified as to enter individuals interviewed the name of the native led cooperative and host nation unless the host nation gives us permission to share certain de-identified information for the benefit of other native and First Nation communities. So, I just wanted to ask if you have any questions before we start about the study? DM: No. 

PS:  Okay. So, we're just and this is cool. This, what they're using to record it, it's called Otter AI. So, it’s kind of will get a cadence of your voice. And it actually will take everything that you're saying and what I'm saying, and it separates the two people. And then if there are any questions, or there's maybe a word or something they didn't understand, though, they'll send that back to you, you can look through your interview, and you can approve it. And at any time, if there's a question that I asked that you don't want to ask, answer, Dave, you just let me know. Okay. So, we're not holding your feet to the fire on anything. So, it's just what you feel comfortable with. So, the first question I'm going to ask you about is your cooperative profile. The name of your cooperative is? DM: RSF.

PS: Where you are located? DM: Our administrative registered administrative offices in Williams Lake, our staff are scattered around British Columbia, we work virtually. And we have inventory, a base of inventory in Steveston, Vancouver. Just inside of Vancouver.PS: So, you're a BC-based cooperative? DM: We're BC-based. Our work has expanded across Canada in the last year or so.

PS:  What is your position or your role in the cooperative? DM: I, my position is business manager. And my role has been developer since day one. I'd be a director, founding director, but I can't be business. You can't be staff member and a director too. So.

PS: You are part of the founding group? DM: Yes. 

PS: How long have you so you've been with a cooperative since the beginning? When did it start? DM: We were formally registered as a fishery as a cooperative and under British Columbia Law in 2014. But I started, we started our team started working on this around 2004. So, it took us ten years of best practices, tables and workshops, and thinking about what we needed before we got to the point where we created a cooperative.

PS:  How many people are employed? DM: There are only four of us that are employed in the cooperative, and there's out of that only two of us are full time. Okay? And I'm not one of those.

PS: How many members? DM: Well, there are five members, five registered members. And they may be accurately portrayed as founding members, as opposed to clients; we have five founding members and probably two or three times that many clients. 

PS: When you're talking about your founding members, are those nations that are part of this? Or how do you be a founding member? DM: Yes, well, they're a combination of nations: Indian nations, communities, Indian communities, and fishing enterprises. Indigenous fishing enterprises are First Nation fishing enterprises and tribal councils. 

DM: And a background in what we are and how we got here. We'll answer a lot of the questions that know why that is. PS: Do you want to share that with me? DM: Sure. Okay. So, I'm actually a biologist. I'm not a business manager, not by training, formal training. The origins of our cooperative are really about how First Nations in British Columbia and the rivers around British Columbia have worked to restore access to the Pacific salmon fishery, that they lost after one hundred years of colonization and industrialization of salmon fisheries in British Columbia. So, we began with an ad hoc table of us, science people, who were grappling with the questions of restoring sufficient salmon returns to the rivers of their origins around British Columbia. Through a strategy that we were targeting the industry, and the marketplace, and what we learned, and my origins go back in this field, to being commissioned by the Secwepemc, the Shuswap Nation, Shuswap tribe back in the late 80s, who commissioned me to find out where did our salmon fishery go and why and what can we do to get it back. And what we learned was the salmon fisheries like all the other salmon fisheries around the world, all later, industrial fisheries around the world have been oversubscribed and overfished. As fishing machines got bigger, faster, and traveled further. And Pacific salmon are anatomists, or they spent a part of their life in freshwater and part of their life in the marine waters. And our Pacific salmon move from their spawning grounds as juvenile fish, and they swim out to sea. They grow as they move up the coast of British Columbia into the North Pacific gyre around the Aleutian Islands and big circling gyres have really productive seawater there, and they spend the next few years growing up there, and then they come back to their rivers of origin, their natal streams. And because we've come up with these highly mobile fishing fleets, everybody is in a rush to get ahead of the other fishermen. And so, they're fishing them in large, mixed aggregations as they become accessible and start making landfall. And what we've learned over the last 30 years or so is that with that, that means that mixed stock fishery means is that we may have a harvest rate that set for most productive stocks, but unfortunately, that means we're overfishing the less productive stocks that swim with them. And so, if you're an Indian nation in the headwaters of the Fraser River, on the Chock Houghton River, one of the major tributaries, and you've got a dip net fishery there and nothing comes back too bad so sad you're the bycatch of somebody else's fishery in the North Pacific. So, one hundred years of that, and most of the indigenous fisheries and in the rivers of British Columbia were almost extirpated. So, we all were involved in an agreement between the First Nations and federal government in the early 1990s, we negotiated the first turn of bilateral agreements and co-management agreements in the West Coast with the federal government, and most of that was focused on consultation around access to food fishing. And as part of the arrangements to get them to the table, there was funding for stock assessment and enhancements and capacity building in the like. So, we put about a decade or so of that behind us. And we came to the collective conclusion that we needed to buy back licenses from the Marine mixed-stock fishery, and transfer them back to the fisheries of origin, not only to do the right thing for the indigenous communities who lost access to their fisheries, but to restore sufficient spawning returns to keep the populations alive, enough different populations alive, in fact, to restore the genetic diversity that once was, was strong in Pacific salmon across the Pacific Northwest. And it was now less than 10% of its original diversity of stocks back, you know, one hundred years ago. So, the federal government agreed with us, not because they wanted to, but because the industrial machines were now big enough and fast enough that they had outstripped the capacity of the resource to pay the mortgages on these vessels. And as we our tribes went to court and, you know, one by one and fought for the preservation of their runs, or fish, there were became more and more restrictions in the marine mixed stock fisheries to the point where, you know, when I started my career, these people fished, I mean, the industrial people fished 365 days a year, pretty much. Today, they're lucky if they get two or three openings of a day or two each a year. And the consequence of that is, it's really hard to pay off a million-dollar mortgage for your big sein boat, if you're only getting two or three days of fishing a year. So as the noise grew louder from the inland to get the fish back home, and to preserve fishing rights, and the Supreme Court of Canada agreed. In the Marine side of the formula, the industry was screaming for compensation. Because it was in their eyes, it was lots of fish out there, it was the minister that was reducing fishing opportunities for them. And it was directly at fault for them not getting enough fishing days. So, a very complex environment we're working in. But so here we were early 2000s. And the programs hadn't even been developed yet. But we developed a working group and a communication with Ottawa, with the federal bureaucrats in Ottawa, and we began experimenting, excuse me, experimenting with the transfer and experimental fishing of the stocks close to home. And that was a big, complicated thing for all of the nations. There are 97 First Nations in the Fraser River alone. And not all of them were warm to the idea of commercial fishing, the salmon stocks that they blamed industry for taking away from them in the first place. And there was a general feeling that bringing commercialization into the river would only make that problem worse. And so, we got some experimental licenses, and we began some small-scale commercial fishing. And we discovered some really significant lessons. The first was that when you buy back these licenses and break them up into their constituent parts and transfer the licenses back to their rivers of origin as we were doing. It's not an even distribution, because they're all different populations with different stock strengths. So, you might have one small fishery every three or four years. And you might get one big fishery every several years and you may have lots of no fishing in the years in between. And so, the first lesson was that the kinds of commodity markets that dominate that drives seafood industry worldwide are not able to support small-scale artisanal fishing in a commercial environment; you simply can't do it; you need more fish more efficiently, more frequently. So, you can big builder by builder, company pipe by bigger boats and fish more efficiently. More fish and sell, you know, you get the picture. It's a formula that's that bound that was bound and determined to fail eventually. And it did. So here we were, ultimately turning the wheel backward, turning time backward, and having to re-invent an economic system around the fishery that would support the new reality of small-scale fisheries that were cyclic and variable. And so, one by one, we all came to the same conclusion that we needed to, in order to make these fisheries work; the hypothesis was we needed to value-add them. And so, we spent those ten years really experimenting with this idea. And we proved it to be true and but more broadly than the basic concept we modeled on paper, we learned that that in order to make small scale fisheries work, again, we needed to invest in the fishery and value-adding the fishery. But we also needed to invest in capacity building, so that at the community level, so that there would be the opportunity to grow into the value chain. So there to make it worthwhile, there had to be more employment, more benefits coming from a broader scope of activities than just fishing. And in the industrial fisheries of today, with most Indigenous communities, like industrial communities around the world, that's a hard change. The primary sources of income from fishing still around the world, in Canada, and our communities, is fishing and brokering fish from your brother. And that's created conflict over brokers and buyers between fish companies and families and tribes and neighbors. And it's an ugly, dysfunctional trade environment. So, we learned a couple of things, then to get our feet up underneath us is that one, we needed to invest in value-adding and the value chain, we needed to get control over the trade environment. And then we learned we needed to figure out how to make these fisheries work economically. And we developed some models to help do that because we got tired of doing it on the back of a napkin all the time. And, you know, the profit margins are very skinny, always everywhere, unless you go back to the old way or the not the old way, the modern way of doing it, where you just kept more and more and more and more and more fish and sell them cheaper and cheaper and higher volumes until the fishery is destroyed and go find another one. And we've run out of places to go to do that. So, then there was another thing we learned that there was a lot of misinformation in the public that we needed to grapple with. First and foremost, in the salmon fishery, that, that the marketplace has this misguided idea that a silver salmon is the only salmon that's worth eating. And that when they come into the rivers, they're not edible. And they're less value. And so, there was a prejudice against so-called River Mark fish. And there was also a policy and a public conflict over the concept that dated back to you know, the origins of colonization and, and the way the industry felt about themselves and their niche in the world marketplace and that by buying back these fish and putting them back into rivers that this was taking away from them. And there had always been an underground economy in the trade of tribal fisheries. And so those two things kind of muddy the water if you've pardon the expression and so, when we first began some of our experiments, we know that one of the first truisms is the best way to make money off your fish is to sell it in In lowest processed form possible, you don't invest a lot of capital in it. So, you started fresh, you get the best price, you invest the least amount of capital, you get the best profits. So, our first roadside stands, we all encountered a lot of this sort of drive-ups and people rolling down the window and thinking, are these Indian Fish. So, we go yes. And they're licensed, and you know, all of that stuff. So, our best practices for grappled with all of these things over the first 10 years, and how are we going to, we're going to tackle it. And we actually published among ourselves a vision document called River to Plate. And in River to Plate, we grappled with the fundamental principles and issues and values together and created a framework for how we were recommending how people want it to move forward in the renewed inland fishery. And it includes basic principles around quality, value, and traceability. And for us, in practical terms, what it really meant was we, we needed to, we needed to educate the marketplace, that these fish were good, good, wholesome food value. And we needed to create an awareness and support for the idea of, of the tribal fisheries again, and we needed to create a market space for ourselves. And so that led us to ultimately, the challenge of, of doing the business of value-adding and branding and marketing our production. And we collectively realized that the best way to solve all of these problems was to flip traceability on its nose, and focus on branding, the tribal fisheries, to the place of origin, their stories, their culture, their history, their conservation, ethics, and all of those great things that come from the fishery of place. And so, we created the RSF, to do what no companies would do for us, we could convince them to do some custom processing, but they wouldn't hold it for us, they certainly wouldn't package it with our labels on it, unless we paid for everything and, and which, of course, we were willing to do. But last thing they wanted to do then was to market because that would be in competition with their production. And most of the fish companies in British Columbia are owned by one man. So. it made it even more complicated for us and more hostile to trade environment. So we incorporated our cooperative to provide an open-access platform of services for the tribes, First Nations in British Columbia, who are dealing with the river fisheries to get the kinds of logistics support, they need to get their fish from the raw form and into market-ready products, to provide the cash flow, financing, they need to purchase to secure the capital in their own backyards. And to do the marketing and sales support, distribution and all of those things. So that they could be, they could realize any economy from their fishery. And then one of our biggest challenges has not been, I mean, all of those things were just practical day-to-day challenges we achieved, I think, success and all of them. But the biggest challenge that we faced right from the beginning was the collapse of the Pacific salmon fishery. And so, one of the elements that I didn't mention that's really important is there's a reality in Indigenous communities, probably the same everywhere. That people won't fish the last fish in their backyard. He just simply won't. And we can talk about the altruism and culture and all of those things. But it's just a fundamentally, it's a fundamental economics. First of all, you burn up enough fossil fuel, you'll come back and you'll, you'll get mad at the manager that told you that you had a license for fishing for the day. And you didn't catch anything. There's no fish there. So, there's a simple economics of fishing, but also window when we had communities that were doing assessment and science program. As well as operating a fishing enterprise, we would have in true indigenous style, we would have community discussions about the fishery. And we would have the stock assessment, people standing up and saying, you can't be doing this, you can't be opening any fisheries, there are not enough fish out. And so on. On numerous occasions, the communities would close down their fishery, even though the government had opened it up. We even had situations where the government threatened us or threatened our communities and said, If you don't harvest these fish, we'll give it to somebody else. And that's still occurs today. And the reality is, the way then migrating fisheries work is you if you've got to allocate the priority in reverse order to access, then you're really putting numbers into a spreadsheet for First Nations in the headwaters that never ever make it there. They all get harvested by the big industrial fisheries downstream. And that was our big, big problem. And so all of this fits together, we embarked on a program to buy back licenses and transfer them back to the fisheries of origin. We developed protocols and our certification self-certification system, so that we knew who we were wanting and able willing to work with. And we began to create our market space and our branded products, and the market loved them. Great. And formed by traditional recipes, and, and supported by online profiles. Every product, every label was QR coded, and traced to an authentication report, and then to the, to the narratives of the community fishery to the culture, the stories, the images, and all of those things, local branding, very popular with really well. But the thing that we couldn't solve was the collapsing salmon fishery in our backyards. So, with limited inventory, and after our first five years of work and validated business plan, and all of those things, we knew we needed more participants, more inventory, more clients. So, we got a mandate from our board to reach out beyond the river fisheries in British Columbia. And we began to look at Coastal First Nations and more broadly, their seafood fisheries. And we discovered that they were no different than our river fisheries. The industrialization had marginalized from their own backyard fishing, and big boats had fished out inshore fisheries and in order to actually make a living in fishing these days, they needed the big machines and the big loans and the big mortgages. They were away from home most of the time, and they were constantly chasing new openings to harvest more fish at ever-decreasing profit margins. Well, I'll be so the concept of investing in a fishery in your own backyard fishing less fish for more value makes sense to them too. And so, they too, were interested in our services for the same reasons and so we did the same things with them. We profiled their fishery, we develop their online profiles, their stories, their images, the background on their culture, their fishery, their conservation, that kind of stuff. We developed labels and engineered packages and products. We created a supply chain and did the same thing for them. And then we found that we were reaching further across the country and whatever our furthers our most remote clients is the community of Pangnirtung, Pangnirtung fisheries in Baffin Island. And these folks, they fish with handlines through eight feet of ice and half a mile of seawater, for 1.2 million pounds of turbot. And they've been selling their fish pennies on the pound wholesale to China since they began because that's the way it's done. And they wanted to invest in more value adding branding and domestic markets. They wanted to have their share of the pie by investing in their own fish production, just like everybody else did. So, as we looked across Canada, we found some interesting realities that most Indigenous communities in Canada can't afford to buy the fish in their own backyard from their own official, and so they don't. We found eighty-seven registered fishing companies, indigenous fishing companies across Canada. Eighteen of those said they were involved in branding value adding marketing, their own fishery And that wasn't true. They wanted to and they philosophically were aimed in that direction. But they suffered from the same problems. Everybody else couldn't raise the capital. The fishermen always sell to their elite. They have their allegiances with fish, big fish companies, and all of that. And so out of the Eighteen that said they were doing it only five actually had products available. And three of them were ours. Right. Wow. That's a problem. Right? So, in Canada, we've got a $6.4 billion industry. And about 1.2% of that economy comes to Indigenous communities. And I would argue that probably every Indigenous community in Canada is somehow or most of them are somehow adjacent to a fishing ground. So that's the backdrop of what we do.

PS: I'm going to have to go through the questions when you're talking about the fishery, because I grew up in Washington State, and I grew up on the Snoqualmie River. And so, when I was a child, I can remember when you were talking about the fish, because the dams are what destroyed the fish in Washington and Oregon. And they did everything. They had tubes, and they were sending them down tubes so they could go back home. And, you know, I was like, Oh my gosh, and I can remember being a child. I'm 68. I can remember the creek being so full of the fish when they came home, that they were sticking out of the water, the salmon, and they were big, you know, and I remember my grandpa used to fish out in the ocean and geez. He caught one, one time, it was bigger than me. It was like eighty-five pounds, you know. And so, we're talking a long time ago, but when I think of a fishery, I think of like what the Snoqualmie people had, they had, they ran a little fishery where they started their, you know, they had their little fingerlings and they raise them, and then they released them back in the water. So, in you're talking about the fishery, this is the adult fish that have come back home. Is that what you're referring to? or so? DM: Yes. Okay. PS: So, do you guys see, like, where I grew up, you weren't allowed to fish the fish when they came back to, you know, to, to lay their eggs. But I can tell you, we all did. I mean, you know, we went out and you know, we throw them up on the shore and then clean them and put them in the freezer. You know, they were just they had just come into the water. But you know, it's so you're in Canada, are you saying that you guys can fish those fish when they come back from the ocean? DM: All the way to the headwaters of the Fraser River at the headwaters of all the major rivers in British Columbia. And of course, we learn what the tribes have known all along that these fish are not only edible, but they’re also good food value. And a dead fish is a dead fish, whether you catch it in the North Pacific, Vancouver Island of the mouth of the Fraser or in Stuart Lake. Right. So good fisheries managers manage a harvest rate. And they ensure enough fish get back not only to spawn, but to also service the ecosystem, which includes the Indigenous populations, the people, fishing communities that live there and in as a reward for fishing around the world, people have learned to steward their fish. You take away the reward, you take away their connection to the resource and the inherent cycle of stewardship that comes with it. So, we've had to restore all of those things. And we have been, and we we've grappled with the misinformation of things like but you're saying that you know it's okay to fish them in the ocean but oh we don't fish when they're spawning and say well a dead fish is a dead fish. Good managers pick how many fish you are licensing to be harvested and don't prejudice the people based on where they live along with a migration route. Because eggs are good eating as our fish heads as is the milk as is all parts of the fish. In fact, indigenous communities and by eating all the parts of the fish, you're celebrating that fish in its life, you're appreciating and then of course you know this so we often grappled with in the early years with, with op-eds and big newspapers that one side of the page it would be, it would be arguing one side of the story that these fish are no good eating, that we're wasting them by, by, you know, buying them from good, profitable industry players and giving them to the Indians, then they're just no good for anything but dog food. And on the other page, it would be an op-ed about, we have to deal with this poaching, and the black-market sales of all these salmon. And so, we go for well, which is it? Are they no good eating? Or are they really good eating? Everybody just wants to buy them, but only through the black-market. PS: As I'm listening to you, what you guys are doing is, well, one, you're saving the fish. And I love that you guys have organized in such a way that you're, you're buying back the licenses. I mean, that is smart. You're  prohibiting these people from going out there and just, you know, in those huge boats and just catching everything, they don't even care what they're catching is just everything gets pulled in. DM: Because they just don't know. They just don't know what they're catching. Right. And they say all of this stories about conservation are BS, because our nets are full again today. Well, yes, but they're full, from another river’s fishery, because you wiped out the previous river’s fishery. So that's still exist, but it's, you know, we've concluded that we're going to have to hold their head under the water until the industry is dead. I hate to hate to say that, particularly in our recording, but that's the reality. PS: Okay. This won't be on public television. DM: Good. Because the industry as we know, it is founded on greed. PS: Yes. And extraction. I mean, we just talked about it. It's all about extraction. And by I mean, I've had so many tribes contact me here, and I've given them your name and number. So, I'm sorry, but there's a group along the Lake Michigan and Lake Superior. And they're looking at how can they come together with the fish. And one has a really well-built dock, you know, for their boats, the other ones don't? How can they you know; how can they do processing? DM: We’d love to hear that's what we do. We'd love to help them. That's what we do. PS: Okay. Oh, good. Good, because I know I had referred her to you. She's the attorney for the tribe, really smart young woman for Bad River. And so, you'll be expecting to get a call from them. And I know there. There' have been some other people with the walleye here that have asked about that. Because that when you were talking about, you know, that underground economy, that's kind of how people sell their walleye. Sure. It's to their brothers to their friends, you know, you'll see somebody with a cooler and tiny fish, you know, and because they're, they're able to fish at certain times when the white fishermen aren't allowed out on the lake. And they were all up in a huff about it because they said the Indians are fishing it out. Well, they weren't the ones that fished it out. It was nice. And you know, so it's a, there's two of the tribes that are really doing some really significant work around restoration. It’s Red Lake and Mille Lacs have really, you know, they're really fighting to protect, you know, the walleye population. Well, I better get on with my questions, or you'll be here till tomorrow when you want to go out of town. DM: So just yet, what you described is the way we're designed is to support that approach, because what you've just described is called food security, right? That's one of our founding principles is food security and sustainability of fishery.

PS:  Can I ask you another question? Do you have.. are you adding some tourism in here into the cooperative? Or is that another group that I'm thinking of? DM: We are doing our members are involved in diversification projects, which include tourism, and Ecotourism. PS: I was just curious because I thought I saw that and I thought, oh, boy, that's really smart. Even just like what you're talking about the Ecotourism is teaching people about the salmon. And you know, it's and then there do you guys have the problem with the farmed salmon? Is that causing a problem with you? Because I heard there they have some sort of a mite or something on them. And it's getting on to the wild population. I don't know if it's in Canada, it’s up in a you know, might be Alaska. DM: It's the same all over the world, but it's a problem in Canada and cotton, no problem in British Columbia. Anytime that you culture, animals, you put them in a very dense, growing living environment and disease. Gross. And the way you deal with diseases, you use penicillin and other kinds of drugs that combat those things and but they're just a reality part of the business. And so, what we've learned about aquaculture around the world is best done in closed contained systems out of the ocean, on dry land, and isolated from wild populations of fish, wherever they might be. Well, we won't get into the issue about how much protein you're stealing from the environment to actually grow pretty rich, very expensive protein for humans to eat. It's not very sustainable in that respect, either. PS: I can't, you know, growing up eating fresh salmon. And now I live in Minnesota, so you're inland and people don't even know what a good piece of salmon tastes like. And I’ll even smell it, I'll have the guy go, let me smell that. Because if it's got a fishy smell, I won't buy it. And then I you know, and now they have to hear they have to say that it's farmed. You know, they have to put it on all inside their cases. DM: And so salmon smells like hotdogs. It just smells like sweet. Meat. It doesn't smell fishy, as you… PS: No, it doesn't, it just has an end, there's just nothing better than a good piece of salmon when you cook it just right? Just flakes. Just you know, those beautiful flakes. And I remember my husband goes I've never met anybody that went, oh, isn't that a beautiful piece of fish, you know, and I'm eating it. But when you get a good piece, you know that you've hit, you know, you've hit the dub the triple sevens, you know, getting a good piece of fish like that. DM: So, there's one other thing I need to describe about what our cooperative does that helps you understand how we do it. So, excuse me the concept of industrial fishing. It is inherently about volume. Yes, and by extension, uniformity, and hence the bright silver ocean run salmon that all look the same. When you move the fishery inland. Those things that drive a different business model I've described are all true. But in addition to that, the changing qualities the fish, which is the nuanced the difference between Good Ocean Bad River, what we learned is that the qualities just change as the fish move in river. And so, you get a higher oil and fat contents in the marine caught fish and just a much richer product which in itself might be a good thing. But in our at some of our early tribal gatherings and workshops. We actually had a big one down in Musqueam. At the moment, the Fraser River and the elders from the upper Fraser River, you know, three hundred miles away, got sick. And at first, of course, everybody thought was food poisoning and the elders knew better. It’s just not food poison. We're not used to eating Sockeye. So rich oil, our stomachs couldn't handle it. That's not how we eat our salmon. And then we related to tribal legend, and these are common in the States as well. Pacific Northwest called coyote breaks the dam. And the story of coyote breaks the dam was about a time when the salmon stopped coming back. And the coyote went downstream and brought the salmon back to its home. This happened back to their homes, and it left them showed them each of the rivers that they belong to. And they lit fires and invited the people back to reacquaint them with the fish and they told them how to catch them sustainably. Again, make sure they're enough went to the spawning grounds and the neighbors upstream. But they also taught them the unique ways in which they prepare the salmon in that place. And so, a big part of our marketing and a big part of our value adding programs is about trying to capture or be inspired by the different ways that the tribes prepared to fish in those areas and to turn those into market-ready products. So, we specialize in Smoke canned products and retort can retort smoke products and candied salmon caviars. Of course, we do cold smoke products, and you know the best of all, or we can get it as good vacuum-packed frozen fillets and steaks and portion packs, and you know those kinds of things. But as you move in river and you're forced to deal with the variety as opposed to uniformity, you're driven to find these products that match with the unique qualities of fish in those places. So, the way we do our businesses we parachute in. And typically, when people don't come looking for us, because they don't like to sell commodity markets anymore, they come to us because the commodity markets just aren’t servicing them anymore. They haven't got the volumes that they require. So, they typically call us in to do triage, we got a problem with our fishery. So, first thing we do is we go in, we profile the fishery, then we take what we've learned, and we build it into a spreadsheet model. It's interactive, dials and levers, so that the managers can say, this is what we want to sell whole. This is what we want to process. This is what we want to turn into candy. This is what we want to make into canned products. They figure all of those things out. And then we provide them with the logistics for the ice, the totes, the trucking, we've got accounts with virtually every processing plant in British Columbia, and a few down south of the border when Jimmy Patterson doesn't let us in. And we take care of all of that we have a shared warehouse in Vancouver in Steveston. And we have distribution and market hubs that the tribes themselves operate in the big cities around British Columbia.

PS: Wow. That is impressive. Well, now, I hope I don't I know I'm going to probably you answered so many of the questions. And I'm just so glad that you really gave me a beautiful education tonight about what it is that you do. And I'm going to just take all those words and just keep them you know, close to me, because it really touches me about you know, everything that you guys are doing to restore the genetic diversity, the buying back the licenses, I love that one. And I was really interested, you know, like one about the fish going around the Aleutian Islands. And, you know, that's where they that must be like their giant nursery. You know, that's where they do all their go into their young adulthood before they come home. In your community, that community that you're working in, or the communities that you're working with along the river, have there been any businesses like what you're doing that have formed there? DM: Absolutely. Yeah, the CFEs, we call them commercial fishing enterprises or CFEs. You know, for short, and our founding members, there's five of them, but three of them operate CFEs. Okay. The Okanagan Aquatic Enterprises is one of them. Harrison Salmon Producers is another one. And in the Upper Fraser, there's like 28 First Nations belong to the Upper Fraser Indigenous Fish Harvesters. So, they've got a long name. U-Fish is the acronym. Okay. Upper Fraser Indigenous Fish Harvesters. PS: So, when you said Harris, is that that big giant lake? DM: Yep. 

PS: I spent a lot of time up there. And I was, you know, an Okanagan, I have some friends that live up in that, you know, in that community. How many cooperatives besides the cooperatives that you're currently a part of have been formed within your community? DM: None. We've been breaking new ground.

PS: Are there any issues in the community? Do you hope that cooperatives can improve? DM: Oh, yes. Well, first and foremost, I mentioned it earlier, creating a responsible transparent trade environment. And it continues to be a point of contention with some fishermen. But communities appreciate it when the cooperative, let me backup. The way we address that is by we've got a something called the, it's an online bidding platform. And we register about five hundred companies. And sometimes even before a fishery starts, we'll put out an offering and they will bid on the products from that from that offering. And then we take the bids, and we provide that to the communities, and they decide who buys their fish. Okay, and so what that's done is it's eliminated the brokers in the middle, it's eliminated the (middleman) which takes a big bite out of everybody's profit margin, sometimes these fish are brokered two or three times before they ever make it to market. So, we've eliminated that. We've also eliminated most importantly, the conflict, the dysfunctions brokers will do many creative things to, to, to get access to fishermen and fish production and including coercions, which tends to cause conflict. And sometimes even worse, we've had gunfights we've seen drugs, we've seen fish being used as mules. We've seen all of that horrible stuff. We've seen midnight poaching, to make quotas. We've seen all of that horrible stuff. And so, the answer your question is, yes, one of the big issues that we tackle upfront is getting control over that nasty train environment. The other thing is, most communities sit by powerlessly as their fishermen were the only access to the fishery, which is worth saying, again, it's obvious, but it's important because they're fishermen, if they need money, they're the access to the resource. They go, and they catch the quotas of the communities. And then they sell them to Big Fish Company. And you go to I was just out at Haida Gwaii. Okay, and I couldn't find a scrap of fish in Haida Gwaii. The only fish, actually, that's a lie. I went to the coop store, the only fish I could find was lungfish from some other country. And I find… PS: That’s up in that Strait area. DM: That's right, Hecate Strait. PS: That's a such a beautiful, environmental, it's so diverse up there. DM: So that we found that was another one of those common things that we found across Canada, in particularly in most Indigenous communities that are rich in fisheries, good luck finding any fish. The fishermen sell them all. So that's the second thing is we help the community get control over their fishery, again, by financing them, so that they can buy their own fish. And that means that their own fish that were being sold, like selling raw logs to China or wherever, you know, they're buying their own fish, and then their value-adding them. And then because it's a burden on the fishermen, to pay for all their gear and their time and their boats and everything they need it, we really learned that it's really the community's responsibility. And we're empowering the communities to buy their own resource and to value-add it. And then you can't force your fishermen. Or let's just say that those that try to force their fishermen are the least successful models. The most successful models are where the community invest in a fishery. And this, this, this dashboard of this spreadsheet modeling that we do for every fishery, they can use that to change the parameters and figure out the best way to make the most money and they can risk manage how much profit they're going to make out of their investment over the next year or two sometimes, and then they can front end load some of that profit so that they can pay their fishermen a little bit more per pound. And just like you'll drive up and down the street looking for a gas station, that'll give you a better deal by a penny or two. Okay, a fisherman will do the same thing, and if their community is consistently paying more, and we like to make sure that we're providing coffee and snacks, and we provide them shelter and bathrooms, and we create a really nice trade environment, then their fishermen will benefit from that. So that's the second thing is we create, we create a trade environment, and we give the community the ability to get control over their fishery again. And that's in addition to more value from last fish, which is you know, about sustainability, and bringing the fish back to the communities so that they, you know, they won't overfish, all of those things make for, you know, food security, food sovereignty and make for good conservation ethics and good trade environments. PS: Well, you answered my other question. So, you just must have your crystal balls working really well tonight. DM: It's a great story. We love to tell it.

PS: Well, it's a beautiful story. I just feel honored that I get to hear this. I mean, it's just so beautiful. So, I'm going to go back because you were one of the founding members. Correct. So how did your cooperative members learn about what a cooperative can do what it can be and what it can do? DM: That's a great question. We began looking, remember we started with the table, the best practices table. I mentioned with a bunch of biologists around, we conducted about thirty workshops over five years before we created this River to Plate vision document. And it was in that that we began to see some clarity. And oh, gosh, I'm sorry, what was the question? PS: How did they learn about what a cooperative is? DM: Oh, yes.  PS: And what it can do? DM: So, we began looking at different business models. And of course, the ones at the top of the page were those that we're all familiar with, you know, we'd like to buy all the fish in these communities. And we'll make products, and we'll make a brand, and we'll sell it on we couldn't agree with the brand would be. And you know, the lowest common denominator is where we ended up with, which is the best formula of all. And so, we, we approached some specialists for help. And then City, the Vancity Bank adopted us, we became their pet. And what we learned is that if you're a cooperative bank, you're nothing if you don't have a pet fishery, cooperative fisheries, cooperative fisheries are the origins cooperatives right around the world. So, they adopted us. They provided us with expert financial advice, and business development advice. And they hired a coop developer, to workshop with us to explore how where and if coops might be a fit for our problem, our challenges? And it did, and it was and, and we did and all of that. And so, we ended up with John Restakis, who is the president of the BC Cooperative Association, and one of his best Co-Op developer colleagues, Marty Frost. And the two of them workshopped us for two or three years before we had designed something that we all thought we could live with. And then we move forward that the very first thing we did wasn't a coop, actually, we created a society to, to codify the values principles, the ideas that would, that we felt that the Fraser River chiefs would support. And so, we created initially, the Inland Salmon Producers Association, or ISPA, that still exists today. And through ISPA, we created a self-certification system and a Charter for Responsible Trade that guided the principles, the ethics, the values that were in “River to Plate”. And it was from ISPA that we learned from these experimental projects. And we needed to start putting some business tools to work. And that table was far too broad, far too political and far, too big to do business. So, we created RSF to do that. And the question you haven't asked yet, but you will, once we grew out of our clothes in the rivers of British Columbia, we formed a program and are working towards recreating a new identity for our cooperative called Authentic Indigenous Seafood. And if you Google us, you'll find our transition is live right now. Google Authentic Indigenous Seafood.
 
PS: So, you actually answered another question. Because one of the things that we were asking, did the steering committee mold cooperative, the cooperative around tribal values and our principles, and it sounds like your, your Inland Salmon Producers Association and starting a society because that's so tribal in its nature, we have all these different societies, that do special things. And so, what you had mentioned was that the Fraser River chiefs it would be something that they would accept, and could you know, they can get on board with. DM: We did not want to start an inter-tribal war. PS: If you really have to have everybody's voice at the table. DM: Because we had, we even had some of the most opposition, they came to one of our workshops. And when they were done, they said, We do not believe in commercialization, but, and they pointed at us and they said, What'd you guys do? We like. And we were off to the races.

PS: Did you adapt standard cooperative development approaches, approaches to like? Did you indigenize some of the standard cooperative approaches to meet the needs of the community? DM: Yes, we're doing that now. Because we had to form something that, you know, kind of a straw man, if you will, or a, you know, a pilot. And we're still really, in a lot of ways, Pamela in, in that, in that form today, as we grew, as you've heard me describe, we've got more clients than we do members now. And that can be a bit problematic philosophically, not to mention business. And so, as we're, we're in the process of reinventing ourselves, where we have the unique opportunity to take what we've learned from the rudimentary cooperative model that we started with, and it's taking us a long time, but that's okay, we're not going anywhere. We are redesigning our cooperative to accommodate members or members, and shares, profit shares, because we, we projected our growth, and it was actually a wonderful experience, we protected our growth. Our board of directors, our business plan was validated what we're doing and how we're doing it and our growth and, and all of a sudden, they were so wow, we never thought was possible. But we can actually see that we're going to be making profits someday. And then somebody said, Well, great. So, we would split that up five ways, because we got five members. And somebody said, Well, oh, we all didn't put in the same amount. Some of our members, two of our three members have been subsidizing the co-op since its start. And they've all contributed something since we've started. So, over the last two years, we've been grappling with that reality. And I've had to go back and account for every penny, every investment monetary or in kind since our inception. That was this year. What a challenge that was. And then we brought back our original coop developer. And so, he's working with us right now to develop membership rules, profit sharing rules and rules for dealing with those historic investments. And that's the rich stuff that your talk here, you're asking about now, and I have to be honest, I don't know where it's going to land. But I guarantee you that it's going to be reflect the values and, and, and perspectives of the First Nations. PS: Yes. Well, that's, that's really exciting, too. DM: Yes, that's why we are redesigning. PS: And then you back to your original while you're really lucky that you got your original person back to help you because they've, you know, they have some institutional memory, you know, and history with you. So, they know, the things that you went through in the beginning, and I think that they can really help you. Have you ever met Trista at Cooperatives First? DM: Something tells me I have. PS: Well, you'll have to talk to her. She's from I think she's from Pine Nation. And she's a native cooperative developer. And she's a really strong businesswoman. But you might want to bring her in to, you know, like, maybe when you're working with some of your elders, to kind of when you revisit those values and those principles and how things because we always had a way that we divided things up. And it was based on the contribution that you made. It wasn't like everybody got the exact same thing because it really was based on kind of your I know, I'm using the wrong word, but like your sweat equity. You know what you… DM: Right, exactly. People have used exactly that expression in our discussions. PS: Yes, it's it. There's a women's group, I should introduce you to them. It's a white corn cooperative, they're on Oneida Nation. Now they their structure is so strict, but they're not incorporated because Oneida Nation doesn't have a cooperative incorporation and they don't want to defer to the state, they've come up with a system that they track everybody's hours that work with, with the growing of the corn, the drying of corn, the processing it. And so that's how they solved their problem was everybody gets their portion based on what they've contributed to the work. And they're really I mean it, it's all women, you know, because it was the women that took care of the corn. So, it's a really interesting way that they've done it. And I thought, while they're stricter than a lot of the native cooperatives that I've been working with, you know, the last few years, and they really do have an interesting model. DM: Please connect me up with that lady, I… 

PS: I will do that, because she works for USET, it's United South and Eastern Tribes. And she's like their agriculture person. But she lives in on, you know, she's from Oneida. They're in Wisconsin. But they have like a time bank. And everybody has today, everything's tracked. So then when they divvy up the corn, then you get, you get based, you get paid in corn, for the work that you've done. And most of them trade that white corn. But let me ask you this, and I will, I'm going to make a note right now. So don't forget Dave. So how were I, I get like bits and pieces when I've been listening to you. But how were community assets identified and use to form the cooperative? I know what you're doing now, or you're saying that you do. DM: We're a producer cooperative. So, community assets only come into the picture in two ways. Your fish harvest is one way and your capital that we can rent and share with other fishing enterprises in our network. So, somebody needs totes, or they need ice, or they need a flatbed truck to get some equipment out there. They need a telehandler, you know, they don't have to spend $150,000 on a telehandler they can rent it off, you know, one of their neighbors. PS: Okay. So, you've got a way where you've identified where all the inventory is, and people can share it. DM:  Yep. PS:  I like that. I like the rental piece too. That's, that may be something we think about what something that we're working on here. DM: There's one other piece if I can add, we discovered because our fisheries are limited that we ran out of inventory at that one of our community stores. We were horrified. Now what do we do? It was really popular, and people were showing up and there's no stock. So, we bought some similar. There's sockeye salmon, actually from the Harrison. We bought some sockeye fillets from salmon from Babine First Nation way up north. They are called Talok. And so. we bought the raw product, we turned it into Phillips vacuum pack, our principle was follow-through. They said, No, it's got to be branded to the Talok fishery to the to the Lake Babine First Nation, so we did that. And it actually outsold our product, or theory is that it wasn't any better. It was just that we had more clients now. But whatever. What we learned in doing that was how to keep market pull. And then Vancity provided us with some expertise in supply chain engineering. And so that we hired somebody that would engineer the products for us. And so, we learned how to engineer cost, a cost framework. And so that meant that no matter where your Sockeye was from just to pick us a product is sold for the same price anywhere. And the profit margin was there for everybody along the supply chain because it was engineered that way. So, whether you were a warehouser or whether you drove it, whether you stored it whether you sold it, everybody had a uniform piece of the pie that they could draw from which opened up the environment for this value chain sharing. So even if you don't have any fisheries, like in the upper Fraser, they're still selling products. They're not their products, but they're still selling them in their store. And they're still making profits. PS: I've never heard of as a supply chain engineer, I love it. DM: So, every product we have is engineered. From the time it enters the gear of our fishermen to the point where it's handed to a customer. And Mark, it's table ready.

PS: Before the cooperative formed, how did the products or services that are offered by your cooperative reach the market previously? DM: They didn't exist. The only with big fish companies so that big fish companies send out they hire freelance brokers who don't own anything. And they're usually pretty slimy. And they run around literally with suitcases full of money, and other coercions. And they do what they can to fill their quota. They run back to the processing plants to get trucks, or totes, or ice, or whatever they need to, to grease the skids to facilitate the logistics, and they then pay cash. Sometimes they don't. They make deals that they don't follow through with and they disappear into the night. So, they often left communities in debt, angry fishermen. You know, they know all of the ugly stuff. And people just said we can't take it anymore. We want change.

PS: So when this happened before? So, it said I think you answered it. The value was set by others before you guys started? DM:  Correct. PS: It was set by your big fishing your big fishing elites? DM: That's right. And the marketplace. Yep.

PS: Now I wanted to ask about the values of the community. Do you have a sense of how you and your culture influence the cooperative? DM: Oh, absolutely. Conservation and stewardship always are first. In everything we say and do. And that comes through in all of the community fishing profiles. Secondly, is food security and cultural security. You can't have a fishing culture if you don't fish. And that also comes through in the products. Right, and the brands. And then there's something about the cooperative economy that appeals to the tribe, tribal cultures, First Nation cultures, the idea of, of, of working together and for common purpose that resonates well in a cooperative business environment. But that's not to say it always plays out that way. I spend a lot of my time doing conflict resolution.

PS: Well, we're just human beings. You're always going to have a there's always going to be scrapping I, I was on a call today. And it's called the good relatives collaborative. And I called my young woman that works with me, and I said, I don't feel like a good relative right now. I'm just like, I just wanted to pick a fight with somebody, I was just like, not feeling like a good relative. I like this stuff. Okay. Are there issues between the call the cooperative and the local community? DM: Absolutely. One of the issues continues to be the fisherman. Sometimes there's this altruistic thing that I don't really feel comfortable with, that fishermen know at all. They know our fishery better than anybody. And they need to direct our fishery. That's a tribal philosophy that's common. And it's not true. The fishermen know more than anybody will ever know about fishing. That is true. But that doesn't necessarily mean they know anything about science, or anything about conservation principles. Other than what practices are inherently part of their culture, which are, you know, in cultivation principles, business or principles are embedded in there. Right. And as far as business goes, humans are humans. They’re greedy. And so, you know, we've had some, our worst conflicts come from greed, and from powerful leaders that intervene and all the good work that we do for their own benefit. That's irreconcilable, it'll always be there. The other thing is in terms of membership, and cost-sharing the burden of building and keeping this thing alive, that's hard. You know, we wouldn't be here, if there wasn't, you know, a couple of us sparkplugs that, that, believe in it, understand it, and foster it, we would have been, you know, they would have eaten their young a long time ago. We have to continue to build this cooperative until such time as it's big enough and robust enough that it can withstand the storms that come our way from greed. And yes, everybody wants to make money. And they demand that of the cooperative, and they don't want to give anything. So, our business plan is very delicate. Our business model, pardon me is very delicate. And it's a really basic business model. It's cost plus 10%. And we take care of everything, including financing. And in fact, one of our greatest lessons it's been about how some of the richest tribes can be the cheapest. Sorry, you get rich, right? Yes. PS: So, I know, I know exactly what you're talking about. They're usually the ones that like, if there's a ride going through, they don't host the people, but it'll be those communities that hardly have any money. And they'll put people off to have a big feast that, you know, they're there to receive them. So yes, that I had a friend that was, he was our assistant chief. And he said, there's nothing like tribal politics that will permanently disfigure and narrow a human being, you know, he said he didn't think it was going to be like that when he went into it. And he just said, oh, it’s rough on a person, you know, to do that. DM: No, I just say it’s just people. I don't limit this to Indigenous communities. I mean, people are greedy. And when it comes to money, they're awful.

PS: I have some Indigenous communities use cooperatives to reinforce traditional systems and values of Native nations and First Peoples. Is that the case here? DM:  Absolutely. PS:  Because it's conservation and stewardship. DM:  and food security, food sovereignty . PS:  security. Yep. Food, secure food and cultural security. DM: Yes. Yes. Exactly. Thank you. PS: Security and sovereignty. 

PS: And then how do you keep the community and tribal leadership engaged in the coop? 
DM: It’s hard. And what's even harder, is engaged in a meaningful way. You know, everybody likes a good slideshow. Everybody loves to taste the products. And everybody loves the communal meetings and all of that, but to get them to sit still long enough to understand the business complexities. It's like pushing rope. Yeah, Dave. Just jump to the chase. Is it lunchtime yet? Right. We're saying this is the really hard stuff. Can you just summarize, right? Right. But when it comes down to the pennies, right, then they're all huffy puffy. And, you know, where's mine and right, and I did you know, at all of that stuff, right, say, well, we described this, we showed you where the profit margins were, we showed you what the costs are, we showed you, you know, how long it takes to turn around product to sales, you know, and it's all of those things. And you know, what I miss most, we have not been able to build a middle management, from the communities. There are fishermen, politicians, and it's a vacuum in between, and that's our worst enemy. PS: So, I wonder how, like, when have you guys are redefining yourselves right now. That’s something that you look for. If there's a person, there's a couple of people that stand out in the community that could fill that gap. And then they're kind of your connector. You know, they're the one that's, you know, I those are always the people I look for; I always call them those informal leaders in the community are those servant leaders. They usually have people always coming to him for advice or help. And those are the ones that I always target when I go in and work in a new community is I go meet with them first and take them food. And we sit down, and you know, I bring tobacco and we talk. Because those are the ones that if they kind of, they'll put up a good word. So that you can keep functioning, you know, in the community, but it really is. And I think even with this pandemic, that gap keeps getting lighter. Having people, it's really difficult to fill positions right now, I don't know what's going on. But it's like, how do we build capacity, but then we need the people to come to the table, that are going to be that bridge and build that, you know, fill that, you know, we can build the capacity in them, so they can in turn do it in the community? DM: Well, that's right. That's absolutely right. And, you know, this is doing the math the other day, I've been at this for 43 years. And I know the technique you describe the problem is at the community level, the lifestyle of fishing is a different world from what we're talking about here. And it's the raw, front end of this industry, we're talking about fishermen who want to be seasonal workers and go on unemployment insurance the rest of the year. It's not conducive to building middle management, those that have progressed, and are the spark plugs that you're referring to are few and far between. And they're overworked. And they become the targets of hostility, violence, and bullying. And so that's tribal. That's the dirty underside of tribalism that I struggle with every day. The you know, the old adage about the white crabs and the red crabs, right? It's alive and well in our communities. And for us as a cooperative, it's poison. PS: It's, we, we deal with that here. And it's, it's really, you know, when I was a lot younger, I just thought, Geez, why are those people just mean, you know, why do they got to be like that. And then I realized, it's, you know, it's part of that historical trauma. And there's a healing that has to take place. So, we're even looking at how we work with our entrepreneurs and artists, because there's a lot of lateral oppression. And then there's microaggression. And there's competition, and there's jealousy. And those things really get in our way, when we try to do good work in our community, you know, that it's, it's about people are at different places in their healing. I'll really be thinking about you as you're looking for that because I know those people are there. We were working with a group Quileute on the peninsula in Washington, they were starting a cooperative in their businesses, but boy, I'll tell you what, it's a fishing community. So, everything is by the time when the tide is coming and going. And it's about the clamming. It's about all those different things. And then it's the berry picking, then it's going out and doing the fishing. And it's a whole different rhythm that they live by. And, and you're right, they want to be they prefer to do the sustenance type living and then not have to work. You know, they don't want to mess with other things. 

PS: Can you share some examples of how the community collaborates with the coop? DM: Yes, typically, the fisheries manager will become stressed, anxious, overwhelmed when a commercial fishery occurs. And we're one stop shopping for that manager. So, they'll call in the analogy I like to use I owe this to my mother was, I didn't like the way she taught me how to ride a bicycle. She put me on a bicycle got me out on the street in downtown Ottawa, rural Ottawa, and ran along beside me pushing me and then let go and said, there you go, you're doing it now. And I crashed and scarred up myself. And she did that until finally I was so frightened. I didn't want to fall over. So, we don't do that. When we pick up a client, we, we hold that client up, and we cover every aspect of their needs, and try and help them to do it all themselves. But what they can't do themselves, we help them. But at the end of the day, we're trying to build as much as this capacity at the community level as we can and we’ll help to ensure they get their licenses organized their landing sites, or bring in labor if they haven't got any, but we encourage them to hire everybody locally, we’ll line them up with training if they need it. We’ll provide them the equipment they need the land or fish to ice and tote their fish will mentor them in basic traceability behavior, filling out the proper forms and having shipping manifests and signing them off with the trucker, ensuring that they share the basic data with us digitally as a function of us taking possession of their catch. And then we provide them with the inventories they need. It's like they're doing it themselves. They've got regular inventory reports, they know what their cost of goods is, they know what their market values are, what their inventory is, and what their current cash standing is. So, we help them through all of those things that they want to do, but they haven't got the capacity in their own shop to do.

PS: What does your board need to continue to grow, prosper and sustain the cooperative? 
DM: More middle managers. What's interesting is that the biologists that were around that best practices table, someone of who I trained, that can be late 80s and early 90s are now my bosses. And they're not biologists anymore. They're counselors and chiefs. So, it's skipped over this whole thing. So, we still have a vacuum in the middle management, but at least they understand the middle management. Okay. And, you know, I'm not sure whether I'll live long enough to see that gap filled. But that's really what's going to make the club stronger, is when we managed to get some middle managers that that can grasp all of these moving parts and understand them can, you know, it's not hard to teach somebody to operate one of our models, we've designed them so that, you know, they've got input fields in there, you know, a grade 12 education, you can operate one of these, but more often than not, they're no, no, no. You guys just do all of that. Show me, you know, what comes out the other end, you know, we want to teach you to do it. This is your model is your data, which is something I didn't mention earlier is that in the, in the in the modern fishery, nobody has data, they all run by the back of a napkin and the seat of their pants, and we build them data, when we do a model for them before a fishery starts. And they risk manage their, their, their business decisions. That's just the first chapter. As the fishery progresses, we populate that model with real data. And they own it. And we give it to them when we're done even if they can't use it. But we of course, show them how to use it, we hang on to those handlebars, make sure that they see how their decisions affect the bottom line.

PS: Is this the same or different set of needs for the cooperative like your members in general? DM: Yeah, I get it. And I think it's the same answer is that our cooperative needs middle managers as much as our fishing enterprises need middle managers. And you know, there's a big industry going on. And I wouldn’t say this if it was ever to be shared publicly, but it's the business of consultation. And so, it's hard to recruit and maintain people that work as hard as I do, when they can make more just by going to meetings as a representative Indian in reconciliation tables. All right. They're getting six hundred bucks a day, free doughnuts and drinking coffee and, and visiting. And they make important decisions. And they have to facilitate that with their community, but it's an industry. We've now got an Indian consultation industry in British Columbia that's alive and prosperous, but it's not doing anything to build any capacity to actually do the heavy lifting. And that's a frightening reality for me day to day. PS: It's another form of an enforced dependence. DM: It is exactly that. PS: You know, that's gotten us into a lot of trouble. 

PS: If this cooperative has the effect you hope for in the long run? What would it look like? 
DM: Ah, that's an excellent question. The answer is, as I've said to other Indigenous leaders across the country, we don't want to take over the country, we want you to build your own cooperative adjacent to your own fishery and govern it yourselves and populate it yourselves. And we want to have a network of cooperatives that do what we do across Canada, and even international. We give away our business plan to anybody that asks. We are creating a national supply chain collaboration, that's what we're doing. But we're not a national organization. And sometimes it feels like we're pushing rope. PS: I always thought if I am a river pusher, I'm like those salmon that swim upstream. And I thought, dang, I could make money doing this. I would be one wealthy woman. You know, like, you're about pushing rope. I push rivers, you know, I was, there's this cartoonist here. I can't think of his name. But I, his last name was Larsen. He had this picture of the salmon. And they were in a motorboat. They were going upstream, you know, for spawning season. And I thought, Oh my God, why don't I think of that? You know, what do I got to push the river all the time? You know. DM: I know that cartoon. That's Far Side. PS: Yeah, Far Side. That's exactly it. That's it. 

PS: What advice would you give to your former self at the start of your cooperative journey? DM: Be a teacher. Take summers off. Be with your family. Know, let's see. Good advice. Geez. I don't know. It's my advice. Well, I guess there's really only one thing that Yeah, and you just said it. We're not in it for the money. Oh, yes. We're in it. Because we believe in something. And we could be doing it whether somebody paid us or not. Yes. And most of the time, nobody's paying. I'm, I guess I'm an elder in my own right now. I do it because I know somebody's got to do it. PS: Yeah, I know what you mean. 

PS: I'm going to ask you some general business questions. And I'm going to try to move you through here. But this has been such a great conversation. Oh, my gosh, I can't wait till Sandy's off silent. He can't talk right now. But I can't wait till Roberto. He's the man that does the qualitative evaluation. He's going to have fun with this interview, I just know it. Okay. What is the coops current annual revenue? So, is it under $25,000, $25,000 to 50,000, $50,000 to 100,000, $100,000 to 200,000, or over $200,000 annually? DM: It's $250,000 to $1,000,000.

PS: How does the cooperative distribute profits or funds to the members? DM: The concept is that profits are distributed proportionately to your contribution. So, if you have a big fishery, if you got a million pounds of fish, your profits are defined by that fishery. So, we don't profit from each other's fisheries yet. Okay. The second layer a profit-making comes from the cost-plus, so the cost plus 10% that are referred to our basic business model. You haven't asked the question yet about, have you got enough members? And how many do you need? And where are you going with that, but we're still not at a stable sustainable level of production to achieve our operational or operational cost goals. So, we still have to reach out for grants from time to time. We still do a lot of consulting work as developing fisheries business plans and, and all that that's not directly related to our production. based business model. But sorry, I got lost. What was the question? PS: Well, it was about how do you distribute profits?  DM: Right. So that what we're working on right now is that and I mentioned that our projections showed significant profits are pending. And are just, it relates to our growth trajectory, and the growth of our volume of production over the 10 years we've been around. And we're seeing that line going up very steadily. And  there's a point at which we're going to outpace our operational costs. And that's what led our board of directors to go holy gosh, we got to start thinking about how to distribute profits that are beyond the production-based profits of the individual fisheries, which are no brainer. So, the plan is to distribute those evenly. And that's what began the fight about, well, who put in what and so I mentioned earlier, going back and sort of forensically reviewing cash contributions, in kind contributions, sweat equity, all of those things, valuing them figuring out how to pay back those, And we said, well, if you're going to do that, and we want to get paid back $100,000 we put over the last 10 years, all that stuff, right? So, the answer is going to be I think what we're working on is  a model where those cash contributions that were made by individuals, we will break those, convert those into shares, and they'll be paid back over time. The in-kind contributions, those are just accepted sweat equity, and everybody's put them in, and we've discounted those, we're not going to monetize them. And so then going forward, we realized that we couldn't, the idea of using shares based on historic contributions to distribute profits in the future was irreconcilable, we've got a couple of big producers among the whole table. And it was untenable to keep that artifact to derive profit sharing for the long term. And so, the idea continues to be profit sharing, even if it's dividends, based on the percentage of the revenues based on, you know, cost for services, that would be divided proportionally based on how much each of the members used it. So, there would be no artifact of historic production that would say you get, you know, over half of the profits, because you're the biggest producer in the cooperative. That was untenable. PS: That's it, yes, that would be really a complex issue to work through. 

PS:  What strategies did or did you use or use to raise capital? DM: Oh, yes, we broke our business plan up, our business model up, into a variety of things. So, we mentioned we provide cost-plus services. And there's the first business line item is just basic logistics. So even if a community doesn't use the cooperative for anything else, we can, we can handle all the logistics, from their landing site to get them to where they want to go at cost plus 10%. So, we'll handle the trucking the ice, the totes, we will provide them the skiffs, the tie handlers, you know, we'd handle all that heavy equipment logistics to get their fishery ready for them to do whatever they want with. So that's the first line item. The second is the engineering of products and the labels and the packaging and, and the processing and managing the inventory until it gets to on-site. And so those production logistics has also cost us 10%. And some of our members don't even draw against their cash accounts. Because as soon as they do their tribes take all their profits. And so, what they want to do is keep their money cycling in the coop to continuously build their nest egg. So, they take the profits, and they use it to value-add the next years of harvest. Okay, and so they've got growing inventories and so they've got growing value in their nest egg. They keep building more and more equity. Very interesting. So, then the third line item mentioned consulting. So, we're hired to build business plans and business models for fishing enterprises or specific fisheries that sometimes to solve a problem sometimes to access grants and contributions. PS: And then you have done grants Have you got? Did you get a loan from a financial institution or a loan from like your members? DM: Yes, we have three kinds of loans. We've got a running line of credit for $150,000, which is about three times too small, we're looking to increase that to a half a million to deal with our current needs. We also took advantage of a COVID grant loan, a business loan, which was 50% non-repayable. So, that's a grant. So, we took that and helped to develop one of our production lines, we've developed a new line of shelf stable candied salmon, it's really good. And thirdly, we do a lot of our operational production. So, we do, we do products through the coops, we invest as a coop in, in products like turkeys and our candied salmon, for example, they're still traceable to the community, they just don’t have the community logo or the label brand on the package. But there, there's a QR code, that when you scan, it tells you which communities with fisheries and links up to their profiles in that way. So, it's a controversial brand. In my perspective, I'm the one that creates the controversy, I would prefer that everything is branded to the community of origin. But when we've got big ticket items, like our candied salmon, it made more sense to create a single generic package. And, and do large scale production. So, we're, our business is now shifting towards commodity markets for our branded value-added products, as opposed to the whole fish fresh out of the fishery. So, we're developing accounts with Cisco and Gordon Food Services and so forth. So, selling by the pallet load, okay, as opposed to retail. So, we do that by using the cash flow of the cooperative. So, it's a loan from our members that we don't pay for. And that’ll probably change as we grow up a bit here. And if we've got standing cash and the accounts from our members, I think, you know, there's a call growing for us to pay interest on those cash accounts. And also, for those that are going into debt to process their production from the year, we're going to start charging them interest. Because, you know, so far, it's like I said, we're still feeling you know, 10 years old here, and we're still in pilot phase are still learning a lot, right? Yes. So, I think we're going to start paying and, and receiving interest on our financial arrangements.

PS: Do you have a budget? I know you do. DM:  Yeah. PS: How often do you look at it or revise it? DM: We look at it quarterly at least we try to, and our budgets about $250 Closing it on $300,000 a year for operations. And we look at it quarterly and we report out to our board annually. And our marketing manager, she's one of our two full time staff. She excels in production metrics. So every product is engineered as I mentioned, everyone has tracking information so we're able to track profit margins and we're at a level of sophistication now we're when our board does meet annually to go over our annual results we look at profit margins by product, we look at our top customers and our top markets and what we can do to improve those and you know what lines of production are we going to discontinue we've for example, discontinued our jerkies. It just wasn't a good enough product and a lot of people really liked it and it sold really well on Amazon but one trip to the Amazon to listen to the comments. Duh, we’re not doing that anymore. I don't like all those negative comments “it smells fishy”. I don't like it. And this is crap. And it looks like it's all chewed up, blah, blah. You know, there's a product that's getting a lot of controversy, just discontinued it.

PS: You already answered this. When you started you did a feasibility study in a business plan when you started? DM: Completely irrelevant. But it got us the cash startup and got us the, you know, the support we needed to go and, and yes, it was uninformed, irrelevant, highly expensive, done by a highly respected financial accounting firm that does this kind of stuff. They knew nothing. PS: It's hard to find those people that understand cooperatives and accounting, it's… DM: Well in the business. Yes. And the business, the things that they looked at the metrics they use, you know, looking back at it now, it's laughable now, knowing what we know now. In retrospect, it just made no sense to anybody but bankers, and it wasn't worth the paper it was printed on in a month.

PS: Now, I think you've answered this one, too. Did you work with anyone else? In doing these things? Like when you started up? Or did you do this only with your group and you had an outside counsel, it sounded like you had a lot of, you know, like, the bank provided a lot of support, the financial, the business planning and the cooperative developer. But also, you've worked with your group members, too, didn't you? I mean, it was… DM: Yes. But the most valuable thing that we have valuable might not be the right word, the most productive thing we ever did was we sued one of the brokers. And that wasn't a cooperative that sued. One of our communities sued the broker, one of our larger fisheries. And the brokers have been taking advantage of them for years, as they always do with everybody. And they've dug their heels in and they sued the broker and the fish company and found all kinds of untoward business had been going on for decades. And the out of court settlements, and it took $100,000 worth of lawyer fees to get a settlement. And the settlement included, one, that the fishing enterprise would continue to work with that broker for five more years. But in those five years, the broker would sell all of the logistics equipment that had been charged against the community for a decade or more to the community, for the community to use and own number one. And number two, that they would teach the community everything that they had learned from the community fishery, so the community could do it themselves. Number three, that in five years, the business relationship was over. That was actually number four. Number three was that they would provide the broker would provide full supply chain accounting to the fishing enterprise. How much fish was taken out, verified with how much arrived at the processing plant. How much what was the recovery rate. What was the cost of ice, totes, trucking, processing, packaging, distribution, sales? And who did you sell to. So, the entire full disclosure and we learned everything that we know today from that, and we teach everybody that all of our clients that now and we give it freely and openly to all of our clients as a standard business practice. There are no secrets.

PS: Boy, that was a good move. Yes, doing that. I mean, I just have a couple more questions. What brought the community together to start the cooperative? I think you've answered this. in your opening statement. DM: It was the desire to get control over the fishery, to generate food security, food sovereignty, to invest in their fishery, to protect their culture, and their fishing lifestyles. And to make viable enterprises, you know, there's one inside joke that that somewhere along the line, it's a bumper sticker. After we work for a while with every community, they always ask us the same question. They lean forward, and they'll just tell us what it takes to break even. That's true every time. Because what they want more than profits, they want to get rid of the conflict. They want their fisherman to fish at home, they want to have fish, for food and for their culture for their community, more than they want to have profits in the bank. They want to have people employed from their community. Right, all of those things and, and without exception, every one of our clients and every one of our members considers the fishing enterprise as a social purpose business. Not everybody in every community agrees with that. In some, in some cases, there's a lot of hostility and conflict over it. But if the community has control over the fishery, it's always the premise that this is a social purpose enterprise that we're here to protect our culture, our fishery, or fish or environment, or food sovereignty, foods, hear all those things. Right, that's common. And it's the foundation of the people that we work for.

PS: Do all your members have to be members of the nation? DM: Oh, that's a really interesting question. Well, first of all, our membership has been closed since we opened. And as I mentioned, we're in the process of looking at how to open up membership. That hasn't stopped us from growing clients. But philosophically, our board of directors, I believe, is, is committed to the principle of community led fisheries, fisheries owned collectively by the communities, not by an individual. We have attempted to work with individuals, and it always, always goes sour. PS: So, when you're talking about community, are you talking about your native community or your First Nations community or? DM: First Nations community. Where the rights and the title are held. Because there's an underpinning in all of this that you've heard, it's about governance. And when we started to make that shift to authentic indigenous seafood, and away from river select, it was really hard for Pangnirtung Fisheries, and Baffin Island, but your river, they wanted to work with us. But philosophically, they were struggling. You're a river. You're a river organization. And so, you know, as we brought authentic indigenous seafood became the program. And so, the struggle, we actually had an individual from a community out of the Arctic Approaches, and they eventually, they backed away, because they were isolated. They weren't, they didn't have anything to do with their community anymore. One, the owner of the business was actually Metis. And I'm not making a judgement here. But he wasn't living in the community any longer. But the name of his company sounded indigenous. And our board of directors began asking themselves, what do we mean by authentic Indigenous seafoods. And I'm not sure we answered it, clearly. But I think if we asked everybody around our board of directors table, they would all agree with what it is, and what it isn't. PS: That's interesting. DM: It's really interesting. I haven't been forced to write a definition yet, but I know they know what it is. PS: Yes. It's, we struggle with that with the arts here. Because we have the Indian Arts and Crafts act. But the problem is, is that you know, we have blood quantum and it's a very divisive thing, you know, in our tribes, and it's kind of it's the have nots and the haves, you know, depending on what type of blood quantum you have, and so Sometimes people feel less than because they don't have enough blood quantum. But then the other issue that we have is people that are a direct descendant. And we've got some issues with our tribes here were in here in Minnesota where I live now the people that were part of the Minnesota Chippewa tribe, which is the sixth Anishinaabe, Niche band, and 1961, they cut off, anybody born after 1961 In a family, they weren't eligible for enrollment. So, I have friends, that their older siblings are all enrollees, but they can't get enrolled. And so, we've got those. And that's a tough one. And then we have people, they are there from that the Stolen Generations where kids were taken and adopted out, and they don't know where they belong, you know, it's so it's like, we struggle with that all the time. This let me get I'm going to get you out of here. I promise you, dang rabbit. This has been such a good conversation. And I really appreciate Sandy, Quinn and Amy for just being with us. 

PS: What process did you use to move from the original startup group to the cooperative as an ongoing entity? DM: Business Engagement, those that had business actually had fisheries that actually needed the services stayed at the table, with the exception of one. They philosophically did not agree with what we do, or what we stood for. They believed almost opposite to everything that we philosophically believed in. They didn't feel that, that there was a future in the river fishery, that they felt that the only future was if they were able to just sort of blend into the white, European industry, and not be seen to stand out. They felt they should be embarrassed by that. They also felt that the only thing DFO (Department of Fisheries and Oceans) did wrong when we bought out these licenses was allowing them to sell them back again. And that created a lot of anger and conflict within our best practices table. They also felt that, that there was no that their business models were developed were not viable. And so, in fact, this last year, they are the first of 26 CFPs, across the province that were incorporated in 2012. They were the first to die. PS: Oh my gosh. DM: We're glad they're gone. They were a thorn in our side. They were anti everything that we stood for. So, it was validating when people said, well, it's told you so.

PS: When you think about the original vision for the coop, how did you nourish that? 
DM: A lot of collaboration. We visited each other and each other's fisheries. Like I said, we had twenty-seven workshops over five years. And we opened up the table to the regulators. We didn't want to come up with something that would surprise the regulators. They became our very best friends in our journey. PS: So that would that be industry regulators? DM:  Just government regulators. PS:  Oh, government regulators. Okay. DM: We tried to bring industry to the table. And it kept going sour too, because they just wanted to take advantage of the table to shut by our fish. PS: Yes. DM: Yes, that was pretty bad. It was distasteful. I actually was in an instance where, where the CEO from the biggest fish company in British Columbia, grabbed me out in the hallway and shook my hand and said, You guys did it. I didn't think you could do it. He said, But you guys did it. It's fantastic. You've done everything right. You're on your way now. Congratulations. I just wanted to tell you before I head back in within five years, we're going to own you. That's a fact. PS: Well, that's really smart. You got the regulators to the table and made him your best friends. That's the way to do it.

PS: When you chose to form a cooperative, how did you explain that to others? Like… DM: Ah, well, because it didn't work like that. We had a number of workshops with the coop developers looking at different models and as well as coops and we looked at how other coops worked around the world. And we filtered through them specifically looking for commonalities with our situation. And we got to the point where everybody around the table that said, that's what we want right there, that one like that said, Oh, that's a producer's cooperative. And we were off to the races.

PS: Okay. Now I already know that you've answered this about how do you see the differences from your cooperative and others that you, you know, that you were up against, you know, the other types of fisheries that aren't very ethical about the way that they're doing things. I hope I'm saying that right. DM: Yes. 

PS:  So, I think you answered that question number 34. And the number 35. And you've answered this, you talked about your marketing plan, and how you market. And you do utilize a website and social media, don't you? DM: Yes. 

PS: Okay. I'm just going to put yes on that one. And all right, issues of management. Do you have non-member management staff? Or is the management volunteer, paid or combination? Is the cooperative worker owned? But you're a producer cooperative So, how would you like to answer that? DM: Well, the fact is that I'm not sure a paid manager would have survived this journey. The greatest strength that I have to have been able to hold the coop together, was not being paid. Try to fire somebody that's not being paid. So, you know, we've gotten far enough now that people have stopped fighting over their beliefs and what should happen. Those that weren't specialists that didn't understand fishing but had a political objective. They eventually, we overcame simply by doing it, by demonstrating and re-demonstrating, testing and testing. And, you know, things that most people would never put up with for a long term. It's been a hard journey, working with the tribes, particularly a number of disparate different tribes. It's a fool's game. PS: Yes, you have to know when to follow. And then, you know, you almost need an arrow shirt, we have a joke about that I always got, I got to turn mine around, because the scuffles in the back and around to the front. But there's, you know, there's something about when we, for me working with Native communities, it's probably the most rewarding work I've ever had. And, and the relationships that you make, and even with some of the problems that we have, there's these relationships that we make that are lifelong relationships. 

PS: Okay, I'm going to, I've got this is my last question. Pretty close. Do you guys have an employee handbook? DM: Well, sort of, we've got an Operations Manual, that we've tried to, from time-to-time update to so that, you know, there was part of a succession plan, right for any organization. But as far as, I guess, you'd call it employee handbook. It's the good, bad and the ugly of how we operate.

PS: Okay. Are there different rules in Canada that you have to follow for operations? Like on-territory or off-territory? DM: Yes. PS: How do you manage those? DM: Well, we've grown to the point where that's becoming irrelevant. The on-territory relevance is all about tax. All right. And we now do because of the value-adding the definition of the value chain. You know, most of the value chain is not in the Indigenous communities. Yes. Right. It occurs after the fish leaves the community. We're adding value by processing and packaging and distributing and then the retail markups and, you know, the decision question by the tax man is all about, you know, how much are you making on reserve versus off reserve? It's not even an issue any longer. We're, all of our profits, really, most of our profits are off reserve.

PS: Okay, now, this is my last question. Are there any other important questions or ideas about the cooperative that you think I should be aware of, and I didn't cover in my questions? DM: Ah that's a tough question. No, I think you've done a really good job. I think we've covered the cover the bases really well here.

PS: Well, you've done a really good job. Oh my gosh, this has been, I'm going to have to say this my number one favorite interview. So, I really learned a lot and I'm just really grateful for the you know, the stories that you shared and, and going way over time, holy buckets!

