Interview with RTZ Leadership (CG),  (PL), (KE). June 3, 2022

KQ: The Southwest Indian Polytechnic Institute has been awarded a grant by the US Department of Agriculture National Institute for Food and Agriculture. The subject area is a comparative study of citizen native and First Nations-led cooperative development in the US and Canada, and analysis of factors associated with the development growth and challenges of all these cooperatives. The goal of the proposed project is to better the understanding of cooperatives within the traditional boundaries of native and First Nation lands, and the factors that contribute to the development and growth of these cooperatives or lack thereof. Through the study, we will seek to expand your own native businesses opportunities, but identify factors associated with First Nation cooperatives, the growth and sustainability in the US and Canada, and sharing these with Native nations leaders and their citizens in the US and Canada. This project has been approved by SIPI’s institutional review boards, all information gathered and analyzed will be deidentified as to enter individuals interviewed the name of the native lead cooperatives, the host nation and other unless the host nation gives us permission to share de- identified information for the benefit of other native First Nation communities. Any questions? 

KQ: The first question is about the cooperative profile. Question 1, section A, where's the cooperative located?  KE: Our cooperative is located within a community of the Yallane Tribe. And the reason why is it's a lot easier access, and we definitely get a lot of flow of traffic through here. So, I think it definitely makes sense. All the checkmarks were checked here to have the cooperative setup here.

KQ: Okay, and Question 1, section B, what is your position and role in? KE: At the beginning of the development, I was appointed as the president of the cooperative, and I still hold that position to this day. CG: My position here is manager. The day-to-day activities, taking care of whatever needs to be done. Either inputting inventory or talking to customers and pretty much it.

KQ: And going on to the next one in the profile, how long have you been with the cooperative? KE: Since it started, I believe that was almost what, three years now? 
Yeah, it's almost been three years. CG: Yeah, and I’ve been the cooperative for about the same time 

KQ: Thank you. How many employees are employees? KE: At the moment? We really don't have regular employees other than CG and PL, who are kind of managing the gallery portion of it. They’re the only ones that are kind of compensated to be here, but only as contract employees versus full-time employees. Other than that, a lot of the stuff done here is volunteer based.

KQ: Okay, do you have a ballpark number? How many members are in the coop? KE: Oh, I’m sure CG probably has a better idea. CG: Yeah, I believe there’s about 17 or 18. I think they actually might be a little bit higher. Originally, I know when we started there was about what, maybe 20. KE: Almost 30. And it kind of kept dwindling at that point. Since the partnership with the Tribal Youth Enrichment Project, under our mentorship programs, we've had an additional 13 members as part of it. So it should be, I would say about close to 40 adult members and then maybe about 8 youth members. I don't know about new apprenticeships, there might be a little bit more, but for the past two and a half years has been kind of stagnant about 30 members I would say. KQ: Okay, do you have any other information you want to share about the partnership? KE: I guess to kind of put it out more of that or give more information about the artist’s apprenticeship. We have partnered with tribal organization here in Yallane called the Tribal Youth Enrichment Project. They have a three-year grant where they are teaching art apprenticeships, three different art apprenticeships a year. And our partnership with them is we give those apprentices a place to display the work. So, they actually become Artisans Co-op members, as well as the mentors teaching. These classes are kind of utilized from the art artists database that we have here within the organization. And so, it's a pretty good partnership. So far, we are the second apprenticeship. And we’ve seen some growth happening with that partnership.

KQ: Cool. I'm looking forward to asking more questions about that. So, the next section in the interview will be just background information to give more context on the cooperative and environmental factors. Question 2 is, are there any examples of businesses within your community? How are these formed? How have they worked out? And what is the community attitude towards these?  KE: As far as business similar to us, there's, I would say, what four, four other art galleries here in our community. All except ours are owned by outside individuals. None that are part of our tribal enrollment. And they've been here for a very long time. Back in the early 60s 70s, when there was a big Yallane Tribe jewelry boom, a lot of these people moved in and created galleries where Yallane Tribe artists can go and sell their crafts and their jewelry. And basically, those people will turn around and resell the stuff they bought. And it's kind of been the same ever since then. And for a majority of it, a lot of times, it's something that's definitely helped the economy here. A lot of Yallane Tribe community artists here depend on a few of these galleries as their main source of income to sell their crafts and their art, too. That’s something that, like I say, a lot of our community members depend on. But also, as far as the business side of it, it does seem a little lopsided, as far as who's getting more of the profits from those arts that are created and that's primarily to galleries and artists kind of retain a little bit of that money that they get for selling those crafts to them. But yeah, so there's a few of them here. They've been here for a very long time. Do know that a lot of people still depend on those galleries as a way to sell but also do know that those galleries profit more than the artists. KQ: What do you think you're…what is the community’s attitude toward outside businesses?
KE: I don’t think, like a majority of them don't really have issue with them. Again, like I said, it's primarily because they are the ones that they sell to. I know, my parents are silversmiths. And they still sell to one of the local galleries here. And it's not their main source of income, but it is one of those venues that they do make revenue from. So, I do understand that there are some good relationships with them. I think a lot of times, it's just because they don't understand the business part of it is how much those galleries make off of the artists. KQ: What's your opinion on the community attitude, CG? CG: I have to agree with KE. A lot of people still sell their work to the galleries. Because that's kind of how they we've been doing ever since we started making jewelry. I think that a lot of people don’t, maybe they don't utilize different networks like selling online. Maybe they don't have paid accounts or maybe don't have access to the Internet. The best way they know how to sell is to go from shop to shop, you know, become more acquainted with the business owners. Maybe that's kind of the way that they felt they get a better deal out of their work, instead of trying to try to get more value from your work instead of wholesaling it to these shops. KQ: Do you know of any other businesses, from community members that have worked, if they were successful or not? KE: The local gallery here, not the gallery, the local grocery store is operated by the community members. I remember way back maybe in the 90s there was an art gallery, though, right across from Express. That used to be run by Yallane Tribe community, I don't know what happened to that one. But I know that one kind of went up and got taken over by new management, buyouts and people. Yeah, other than that, you know, when… KQ: Do you have any ideas, CG, here? (No response)

KQ: So, moving on to Question 3, have any other cooperatives besides a cooperative that you're currently a part of formed in your community? If the answer is yes, can you please tell me more? KE: Yeah, so there is another cooperative here. And they're called the Yallane Tribe Coop. And originally, I know that he started as a cooperative. And I remember there are some people that are still part of the Board by as far as meeting or having members. I really don't recall any of those like services that we provide here. And I think they primarily operate more like an individual business now, which is just down the road. And I remember how there was some talks of this starting up, and just a little bit of discretion as far as using the term cooperative. So well, there is one here. I don't think it has its legal status as a cooperative, but it still goes by Yallane Tribe Coop. And I think it primarily operates more like an individual business than an artist cooperative. KQ: So, would you say they're kind of not so much doubtful, but how they've been acting as an individual business has impacted the communities view on a coop? KE: Yeah. Because as far as the understanding of what a cooperative is, I think a lot of people still kind of have some misconception as far as what it's supposed to do and how it's supposed to work. That cooperative – they're a lot of times they do wholesaling. So, they buy directly from the artists and resell the work, which, our cooperative here does – we work on a consignment basis. Sales. And I think that's one of the things that makes it difficult is the consignment part of it. People are so used to going into a gallery, selling their work, and getting a small portion of that money to utilize already but for us, we do give a higher payout is just though, the waiting time as far as when a piece sells. I think when people think of the coop, when we were first starting, they were looking at this new coop, and it's bigger and a lot, it's just another gallery. There's not much that they do or there's no, I guess, benefits of being part of a coop. And I think that's one of the things that kind of made it difficult for us is this conception of what actual cooperative is. KQ: Do you want to add anything else to that, Chris? OK. 

KQ: Moving on (to Question 4) are there any issues in the community, that you hope the cooperative would improve or resolve? Any challenges?  KE: Yeah, and think that going again, one of the issues definitely that we looked at – we wanted to really take on was giving the I guess you can say giving the power back on to the artists as far as being able to dictate your own economy as far as the art economy, because now, a lot of times galleries are the ones that set the price as far as what your art is going to be worth. Which sometimes it benefits the gallery more than the artists. A lot of times you'll see artists go in with their crafts or their art. And a lot of these people that work there will try to reduce the price that the artist is asking for. A lot of times, again, because that is their main source of income, they're more willing to lower their prices because they're in need of money. Right away until a lot of times they would sacrifice their prices just so that way they can get financial compensation right then and there. But one of the things we wanted to do is regain the control and be able to dictate our own economy and be able to say this is how much our art is worth, without somebody trying to minimize the price just to gain more profit for themselves. And I think that was one of the issues that we want to see improve, at least, we do understand that. Like CG mentioned earlier, selling through a gallery is only one stream of one venue that artists can definitely sell to. There are definitely other options like online sales, or there's a lot of social media sales that I've seen now. Going to art shows and going to different places like that there's a lot of different venues. But being a cooperative here, we want to make sure that people are aware of another venue that they can seek and kind of help with their art. And giving them that control of setting their own prices and not having somebody dictate how much their art is going to be worth. So that's definitely the hope. I think one for-sure vision, goal that I definitely saw is that, and I know that we're still years from that, is that anytime somebody thinks Yallane Tribe art, they think of the Yallane Tribe Cooperative here. And you know, anytime people want to buy Yallane Tribe art, they basically come here. So hopefully, at some point, that's basically our goal and that way we can involve more members. We can definitely improve our marketing and different things. But I think that's something that we're trying to strive for is that when people think is unique art, to all guaranteed authenticity and everything. Have them just kind of think of the Yallane Tribe Artists Cooperative here because it is run and owned by the artists themselves. KQ: CG, do you have any other hopes for the cooperative to help improve our resolve in the community? CG: Yeah, well, in the past month or so it's been a lot of change in the cooperatives. We have more members, 32. Going back to volunteering, we have more people coming in and more artists are interested. Yeah, we have had applications go out. We're hoping that some of those will come back and get new members and get them up to speed on all those different marketing techniques that KE mentioned. We can help them grow as artists, and put their work out there, through the gallery. And so that's one of the things that I think is the most effective way for these artists to have more value from them. KQ: Sharing, let's say the sharing of knowledge, the technical marketing and technical aspect of selling? CG: Yes. So that's a good thing that we do here. Eventually, we'll share knowledge between artists, active members, that's been working on.

KQ: Okay. Going on to Question 5, which is in the same vein, are there any issues in the cooperatives that have helped resolve any issues around here?  KE: Definitely improved. I think one of the things that we helped improve was the artists being able to network together. Prior to the gallery here in the cooperative here. I knew you KQ as an artist and knew our ROI. I knew other painters, but never really talked or shared ideas with one another. I know, I've seen a lot of different jewelers and potters. And a lot of times, these artists kind of worked in their own individual silos and just kind of created and work by themselves and never really reached out or never really connected with other artists other than maybe family. But I think once the gallery was, or the Cooperative was put together, a lot of times what we saw was an improvement in those communications, then a lot of sharing ideas and skill sharing even too. And I think that helped a lot of individual artists improve their art, as well as improve their businesses, I definitely could remember once seeing one of our members working here on her jewelry, and then another member came in and started showing her different ways of doing the same thing. She was doing just more productive and more efficiently. And I think a lot of those sharings wouldn't have been possible if we didn't have a cooperative here. And I have a network of artists that could reach out to one another, work together or share ideas, share skills, and teach each other. I think that's one of the best things that I've seen so far. And being able to share with one another, helped improve a lot of that communications and broke down the silos and kind of have artists come together and really have this cool knowledge base of people being willing and able to share with people who want to learn different paths or want to improve their craft. I think that, in itself, was probably worth having all of these things happen, because you said we knew who you were as an artist, but we never really reached out or never really had the chance to kind of sit down and talk or even share opportunities. And I think we've done some projects together. And that worked out to the best, best interest for both of us involved. And I think that's something that's really helpful and really good to see having artists come together and bring each other’s up and share these opportunities that are shared these thoughts and ideas. KQ: Definitely brought a lot more trust into the community a lot less hostility. Do you have any other issues that the cooperative has improved the result, CG? CG: No, I think that's pretty accurate.

KQ: All righty, so we're moving to the next part of it. Which is conception and mission. Question 6, how have your community members learned about the cooperative? What a cooperative should be and through visiting other cooperatives, reading reports?  KE: Yeah, so we were lucky that the tribal college here was able to secure a grant and we're working with an organization called Cooperative Catalyst from Albuquerque. And we've had meetings basically, almost monthly, and then these became bi-weekly, and then it became weekly. And basically, it was Cooperative 101 for a lot of our artists and a lot of people including me, as far as learning what a cooperative should be. I think that that resource was something that was really good for an organization like that to come in. And basically, tell us what a cooperative is, how it works, how it functions, what documents we need, and bylaws, articles of incorporation, and all of those things, that you need it to have to be considered a cooperative, I think that helped a whole lot because if that wasn't there, definitely, we do learn a lot on our own and figure things out but I think that just kind of streamlined a lot of those things, having somebody tell you, okay, this is what you need to do. Now, this is what you need to figure out. And this is what you need to have in place to be considered a cooperative. And so having those ladies from Cooperative Catalyst come in and just kind of share, and show step by step, what we needed to do to be incorporated as a cooperative. And so very informative. That, I think that helped. Well, along with that same grant, we were able to visit a couple of cooperatives within our, our state here, and kind of see how they were structured and how they set up. And basically, they were just kind of guiding us. And we were the ones to decide, you know, how we wanted our cooperatives to be structured and how we wanted it to work that's going to fit our community and their needs and the resources that we had here. I think Cooperative Catalyst was an organization that kind of really, definitely helped pave the path for us to really understand what it is and how it's going to work and how it should work. But also given us that free range for us to be able to structure it the way we wanted to. There's definitely some more that we still need to understand I know as far as the good foundation. I think that helped us get to there. KQ: Would you say, CG, your process of learning what a corporate is along the same lines or different? CG: I remember going to the first meeting in the college. But after that I wasn't so much involved, other than becoming a member and having some of the meetings. Cooperatives board was meeting with Artwalk. Its members.

KQ: Okay, KE, I know you're a part of the steering committee. And, CG, go ahead and jump in if you'd like to. But this one (Question 7) is did the steering committee evolve the cooperative around tribal values and your principles? KE: Yeah, I think that's that was one of those goals that we had striving, one of the goals we had moving forward. The whole organization and the whole idea basically came from an individual who saw a women's cooperative all the way in Africa, and they were basket makers. And a lot of the things that he saw kind of was a lot of the Yallane Tribe values that we were brought up with as far as the business model., But and I think that's something that he saw that could  fit our community and the same values that we have within our families and within our households as far as helping one another and looking at the community as a whole versus an individual. I think that was something that kind of pushed the direction of our cooperative and our business model and how we were going to be set up. So, yeah, a lot of the traditional values that we have within our community. We try to implement as much as those into our business model as far as our cooperative here.

KQ: Okay, so moving on to the next one (Question 8), did you adopt standard coop value or development approaches to meeting your needs for your community?  KE: Yeah, I think that being a native community, and really, again, going back to those traditional values and teachings, I think that's something that we wanted to change to fit our community, here. We saw different cooperatives and how they were set up. And a lot of the business models that we saw and how they were set up. I think one of the things we want to do was change a lot of those things to pick our own individuals here in our community, and just kind of make it feel more like a family versus a business. And having that, I guess the ability to do that was definitely something that was helpful too. It definitely helped to be able to adapt and change a lot of those to fit our needs here.

KQ: So, in that same vein, (Question 9) how would you say like community assets are values that were identified, were they used to form the cooperatives in the community?
KE: I think the good, one of the best things about this organization is there was a lot of knowledgeable people, and good amount of skilled people, part of the development of this cooperative. And I think a lot of those assets were identified within those groups. And when we needed things done, or we needed information or some kind of knowledge, there was somebody within that group that was able to share their knowledge with us and be able to utilize them. A lot of times we really didn't have to look further than the group itself. As far as identifying different assets or having that knowledge, as far as financial. We did have some donations that were made. Some of the grants that were received kind of helped a lot with the learning process of it. And I think that kind of helped ease us there. But yeah, I think the group itself, you know, there were a lot of actors in there and utilize them and identify and identify them right away because we knew who they were and what they were capable of.

KQ: So, (Question 10) before the cooperative came to be, how were artwork and other artwork services kind of marketed before?  KE: Again, a lot of them are dependent on the local galleries here in Yallane Tribe. Also, in Gallup. I know a lot of people who go to Albuquerque or Santa Fe, to sell to a lot of those galleries there. Then there are other artists that had some connections or kind of had some other understandings of different opportunities. I’d know some artists that will go to different art shows or different things to sell directly to customers. Very seldom did I hear about people selling online. Prior to the gallery, I have seen people selling through social media but that was kind of more directly toward a smaller audience within our community and not venturing further off from there, but I think the galleries here, the galleries in Albuquerque, Santa Fe, we were always see people so and then there's a few groups of artists that will go to different art shows, then what's out there? KQ: And so, CG, do you have anything to say about like, how artists sold their work beforehand? Like, be it online, art shows, traders and, yeah, I think that was maybe how artists sold their work? Really hard for others. CG: We have different events throughout the year that people do attend. We have people used to utilize the Visitor Center, outside, out there on the little patio door. And so there to travelers and stuff. I did that for a couple of years. I was very successful and selling online, for the most part. But I know that my family that did jewelry did go to mini, go to shops there, galleries in Gallup and pawn shops and all that. Yeah, that's pretty much it.

KQ: (Question 11) How would you say that the artwork was valued or kind of was the price set by other people other than yourselves?  KE: Yeah, I think that's one of the things like I stated earlier is that the artists really did dictate – what they’d go into a gallery with a set price. And then a lot of times what happens is the gallery owner, whoever's in charge of purchasing, will ask the artists if they were okay with lowering the price by a few dollars per piece or a certain amount. And so, in a way they kind of did. But I think a lot of times the gallery would be the one to kind of really dictate how much do you want it to be for it. And so, artists, they have an idea in mind. But when they go in a lot of times that that amount that they go in, when going with isn't the price that they were, that that's not the price that they would get. I know, again, in my parents as an example, that created some habits, as far as how they dictate their own price. Especially when they create something. A lot of times, they never really get any kind of education or training on how to set prices or even using any kind of pricing models to come up with a good price for art that they create and so a lot of times when they create something, they're very timid. As far as pricing a piece high, because they're going to be afraid. They're afraid that they're going to be told that that's too high that they're not going to buy it or they're going to be told the same thing. They always hear someone will buy it, there has to be a lower price than that. And I remember conversations growing up with my parents always talking about how much do we price it? And you know, a lot of times when they go up too high, they even kind of make themselves feel like that's too high. And that they're what they're thinking is too high of a price to sell their work with. And I think that's something that's kind of troubling to see that, you know, they put all of that work in, and they put all that time and effort into creating something really beautiful, and nice. And they don't think it's worth what they think it is. Again, it's just being conditioned into thinking they set a price. And it's always been cut down. And I think this is something that they got so used to is that they have a price in mind, but they know it's going to be cut down. And so instead of shooting high, they kind of lowball themselves and say, well, let's start low so that we hope we don't hear no. And they just buy it for whatever price you see. But I think that's something that as I see a lot of community members is they're kind of conditioned into thinking that their work isn't worth as much as they're thinking because the galleries are going to tell them, no, we'll buy it at this lower price. I do feel like others do set the value for their work. And they're conditioned to think that their artwork isn't worth what do you think they should be. KQ: So, it kind of impacts your mentality? KE: Yeah, definitely. I mean, because I think when you hear no, it is deflating. And if you keep hearing that repeatedly, you know, you kind of get conditioned to think well, okay, this is too much for this much. So, I got to make sure that I bring my prices down so that we don't get told no. And I think that's something that I see a lot is that a lot of our community members are conditioned to set their prices low because of being told, either no, they're not going to buy it because it's too high or always going in and having their prices being reduced by the owners or whoever's in charge of purchasing. KQ: Yeah, I think everybody's gone through that. Going through that process. CG, do you have any other stories or examples of your work or that other people are being said? CG: Yeah, it’s degrading when you go to the gallery, when you're going to try and sell a big piece or you're trying to sell a high priced, you know, they don't buy, usually what I did was on value, price, my work at a high value, and then offer to sell it to the shop at half price. Yeah, I think that the mentality of that kind of, the way you do things is definitely it's not about the gallery saying this is about you saying and yes or no to the gallery, whatever value or return you receive, so just that in mind I had that high price, but I’ll offer the gallery half-price for that just anywhere. It didn’t matter Turquoise Village or Keshi in Santa Fe (NM). But then I also have this idea. You know, when you kind of sit in those, when you're having an event, you're trying to set your price to you can afford to cut your price in half. And just you know, without going through the middleman, we're selling directly to the public. It's a better price, and there's no better deal. You'll see repeat customers coming to you with that, that kind of price value of your work. That I have set for my work. KQ: And these galleries and traders talk to each other? KE: The other thing too, is that, that this gallery, the cooperative definitely helped with, too, is the different markets and understanding the different markets as far as how you're selling it, or if it's wholesale, jobber or retail. It was really interesting to see some of the artists who only sell at either jobber or wholesale, when they bring in stuff into the gallery, they're so used to that low jobber or wholesale price and they don't know that and you know, galleries turn around and put a retail price on it. And I think that was something interesting to see some members coming and see me. Okay, well, I usually tell it to this gallery for just as much, so I want to put it in for this much as we kind of had to tell them no, that's how much you sell it to the gallery for. When they purchase it when you sell it either in their store online, then they are either two times, three times, or depending on how many times you want to multiply by that what the retail price is going to be. And just really having them understand the different markets that we sell to it's the jobber, which is the very bottom, wholesale, or its retail, and the different opportunities that you have to sell at those different places. And so, I think that was one of the other things that really helped with this gallery is having them understand the different markets that they're selling to.

KQ: Do you have any sense of how you or your culture influenced and collaborative otherwise, do you feel that your indigenous native identity has influenced your coop?  
KE: Yeah. And I think I said, going back to a lot of these traditional values, and actually kind of thinking about it, it was a lot of these things that we were brought up with. A lot of times, we don't practice anymore, and I think that was something that was really helpful with this gallery. You know, we kind of go back to a lot of those traditional teachings. And in the way this was set up, so that way, one of those, I guess one of those values that we have is helping each other, especially when somebody's need. And I think that's something that helped to with this gallery is the overhead of running this gallery isn't just on one person but spread out between all of the members. Everybody does their part, either through sales or volunteer work or any other means that will support this gallery. And when somebody's doing good, and somebody's selling a lot, they're putting more in, but it's also helping those other ones that might not mean having such a good selling month, or something. A lot of those traditional values that we saw, way back before a lot of these, I guess Western ideas kind of really took over. One of the examples that we always talked about was gardening. The Yallane Tribe community was primarily farmers and gardeners. And that's basically how they were able to sustain themselves by growing the foods they needed to nourish themselves. And so, when an individual seemed to have an abundance of crops that they grew, seeing somebody that's struggling or somebody that does not have a lot, they will help them by, you know, giving some of their crops so give someone some of the corn or whatever it was grown there. So that way, the community as a whole works together to help each other versus just one person benefiting everything in one person. One person kind of having a lot. (Note, this also answered Question 14.)

KQ: (An additional individual joins the group – KQ reviews the Introductory Statement and obtains informed consent.) Okay, so another person's here, PL. So, I'm going to hand over the informed consent and keep rolling. Yeah, so we have a new person who just came in. For me, that's basically the informed consent for this interview. That's just saying that will keep your name and whatever you say here confidential. Unless CCNM or anybody wants to make the story or whatever anybody has to say, we'll get we'll get permission from the coop, you and the tribe, everybody. And if you see anything that you didn't feel comfortable saying, if you want that redacted, we can totally do that for you, too. So just to let you know that from the beginning, the same level your information will be given out there everything will be remain confidential. Let me just read you the first part just so we're on the same page – the introduction to SIPI. SIPI has been awarded a grant to the US Department of Agriculture, National Institute for Food and Agriculture. The subject area is a comparative study of citizen native and First Nations-led corporative development in the US and Canada. And analysis. factors associated with the growth and challenges of these cooperatives. The goal of the proposed project is a better to better understand corporate within the traditional boundaries of native and First Nation lands and the factors that contribute to the development and growth of these cooperatives are during the studies that we seek to expand rule native businesses business opportunities, but identifying factors associated with First Nation corporate growth and sustainability in the US and Canada. Sharing with these Native Nations leaders and their citizens in the US and Canada. This project has been approved by SIPI’s Institutional Review Board; all the information gathered will be de-identified individuals interviewed, the name of the cooperative and the host nation unless host nation gives us permission to share. Certainly, de-identified information for the benefit of other Native and First Nation communities.

KQ: So, this is the values and the community section. Feel free to answer however you would like to. (Question 13) Are there any issues between the co-op and the local community?  KE: But in different things, there's some trust issues as far as a cooperative. I see that as far as our memberships kind of staying the same. Again, people are so used to selling to galleries and getting their money right then and there. And with our model being a consignment base, sales. That's one of the issues that we can have. The issue is that people want to get paid right then and there versus kind of having something in the gallery displaying and waiting to get paid once it sells. I just think that's one of our biggest issues. As far as having people understand how our model is here. We've had talked about becoming a wholesaling, cooperative, but then it just kind of goes back to being basically another gallery here where we we're trying to profit more than the artists. And I think that's one of our foremost goals here is that we want the artist to be more profitable than the gallery. And all we want on the gallery portion is just to have that little bit of financial compensation to keep this building open and to be able to do the things we need to do in order to sell the stuff. I think there still is a few that trust – trust between the community and the co-op – because we're structured differently. We don't pay money right then and there. But I think that's just one of the things that we’ve hopefully want to overcome instead of having them really understand that it doesn't have to be the only place where they sell everything, but it could be another venue that they can reach out to and be a part of what could help with their business. But I think just the trust that we don't have because of our business model being different than the galleries around. KQ: Just anything to share, PL? PL: Yeah. I wanted to talk about the Artisans Co-op and local TYEP youth that we incorporated into our gallery here. And I've seen the youth are more interested in than the adult members that we have here, and the youth are really anxious to do work and be involved with the arts. And I'm really happy about that. To see them all interested. KQ: Yeah, well, hopefully we can get even more youth involved and get all the adult members involved. Are there any more issues that you can see between the coop and the community level? PL: Which basically what KE was talking about that. Yeah, trust issues between the local people and the shop here. We find it difficult for the artists to bring in, submit their inventory and sometimes we hardly have any, but we still keep going. We're going to have any… CG: So much. I know that a lot of community members, not the artists but just the members. They do come in and they see the work and they are happy to see it. They are happy to buy it. They often ask, do we have a 50% off discount? Can we do the same? No. We've actually done what the other shop owners do for the residents. Some non-Yallane people do go into the gallery, and they buy for 50% and turn around sell for retail for them to the gallery, shops, they stay in business, that kind of thing. So, something I've observed is that they're trying to do ask for that 50% off. Or maybe that kind of makes them feel like they should go to the other shop instead of buying. Or they may see something similar that would be. KQ: Very good on this question. Makes me mad. KE: But I think that can I get a lot of misinformation of, you know, again, the difference between our cooperative here and what’s regarded as a Yallane Tribe coop down the street. Again, they're both listed as cooperative. But I think, really understanding the benefits and services, as far as what a cooperative can provide, is kind of hard for us team because people don't really ask all the kind of think about is the gallery itself and being able to sell their art. And I think that might be something on our part too, is that we really haven't put out a lot of the services that we have to our community. As you can see, we have a whole bunch of state-of-the-art silversmithing equipment, we've got laboratory, grinding wheels, we have workstations here, and some really cool tools that's really being underutilized right now. Because a lot of people don't know about that these are available for community artists to use whether you’re a member or if you're not a member, but definitely be a member. But I think it's just a lot of that information, we're just kind of a hidden gem, unless you really find out unless you really know about it, then you know, what's all part of being part of the cooperative, but I think a lot of times, like I said, we're the mindset of the communities, everybody's kind of done their thing for so many years that they're just kind of used to doing it the same way over and over again, and really not to open to that change as far as being able to network with people or being able to share some ideas with other people. It's fine, we have a lot of stuff here that's being underutilized that people will definitely benefit from. I think that's one of the issues that we have is we need to find a way to let people know that this is available for local community artists, whether you're a member or not, but those benefits and services are free of charge to our members. So being part of the cooperative is definitely something that can benefit you. PL: We do invite the members and we put it out there we have workstations here we try to make it sound so elaborate, but nobody even comes to take to take part in our workstations. But I've used our workstations here and I like it. They will polish my jewelry like there the other day. So, if all the other members could be able to come and utilize this it will be really great for the tourist people to see people at work.

KQ: Yeah. Definitely something we can hopefully address in the future. Okay, so going on to the next section, which is ongoing operations. (Question 15) How do you keep community and tribal leadership engaged?  KE: I do know we do with them periodically. Not very often. We do (hesitation) we probably don't to be honest. We do every now and then. If there's an opportunity that comes that's when we have that engagement. I like one of the council members came by with an opportunity with the Grand Canyon. So, they know we're here. We know that there as far as a lot of the community should they were there to kind of check mark our forms and everything to make sure we're okay to do a lot of these things. But as far as that there really hasn't been too much involvement with the tribal leaders, tribal programs and organization definitely has been part of it. Tribal Main Street, the new pueblo Tribal Main Street has definitely been one of those organizations that we utilize a lot and have helped in our development into becoming a cooperative. And a lot of the tools that we have here is thanks to them. And so as far as our reach to our leadership, we have been doing an adequate job of it. Like I said, they know we're here. We know they're there. They hardly know what we do. And we also any kind of issues or things that might come up, we know that they are there that we can reach out to them. But I think that as far as signing permits or filling out forms that need to maintain the business. I think that's all we really do as far as reaching out but other organizations and other communities for our programs. We definitely utilize them a lot. Like I said, Tribal Mainstreet is one of those organizations, Tribal Youth Enrichment Project is one of those others, Ashford College is another organization that definitely helps contribute to this cooperative here. And so yeah, we know they're there. They know we're here. But and we've never really personally reached out to them for anything. And other than just a few opportunities here and there, they kind of do share with us. They've never really said how can we help you? How can we help one another? So, I think that might be something that we've definitely should look into more and just kind of letting them know. Hopefully, that could be a way that we can get more members involved. As well as letting our tribal leadership know what we do as far as the artists cooperative and how we can benefit our community and see how our government can help our organization. Yeah, we know they're there. They know we’re here. PL: Our present Governor and Lieutenant Governor know that we're here and, and election year, so they've been posting out what they've been doing. And they posted that they can't, they'll continue to support the arts and our gallery here and along with the colleagues. And yeah, so the, the Governor and Lieutenant Governor know that we're here and, and it stated, yeah, their statement was that they're here to help the artists and to help our continued occupancy in this building here for our cooperative.

KQ: Interesting that we're just across the street. Yeah, it's definitely something we could improve on. But moving on to the next Question 16. I know you guys mentioned TYEP or Tribal Youth Enrichment project. Can you share examples of a community collaborations?  
KE: Yeah, I think that was probably one of our biggest one was collaborating, because it not only utilizes the gallery space here, but it also utilizes our membership artists here. So myself, was able to teach membership or apprenticeship with Tribal Youth Enrichment Project. One of our local potters here who is part of the membership is also teaching the current apprenticeship program. The members, or the students taking part in the apprenticeship like panelists are coming here now because they're part of the art gallery, that they're coming in with the enthusiasm that we've been lacking to kind of help maintain and facilitate the gallery here. And I think that's something that is one good example of how we can be collaborating with our community. We've done some different art shows here where we have local community artists, who aren't members can take part here and just kind of be able to just do different things that can hopefully create interest into having people to cooperate, but I think that's one of the biggest collaborations you've seen again Mainstreet is definitely one of those programs. That really helps. And we've collaborated, we've given some things like for the organization and they've given us I'm support in different areas. And we I know at one point I was a cultural bearer, and you were also a cultural bearer for the Tribal Mainstreet. And so, I think a lot of people are kind of the same people in different organizations, I think that that kind of helped, because you know, who's part of what organization where you go to help work with one another in that. PL: That’s also the visitor center, when they do have tourists or visitors that come, they call us to set up demonstrations. And this last recent one we did was on pottery and a guest artist came, and he did a demonstration for a group of people. And everybody was happy about it and put it on Facebook and had some good comments about it. KQ: Has the co-op offered any trainings and workshops in the community? KE: Yeah, a couple of years back. 2019, we were able to actually host a, what did we call it? It was it a conference of artists. And we actually utilized our local artists, as the instructors or teachers have whatever topic or skill or craft that they were willing to share. And we had local community come in and participate in these classes. And they'll happen to hear, and I think that was a really cool thing to see happen. Again, this cross training between artists and sharing, knowledge sharing. As far as you know, we're not just creating art, but the significance of the art that we're creating, to have all of those things share with community members, that just part of this conference was something that was really cool to see. So, I know we had a local silversmith, take us over to his workshop, and use all his tools and his equipment and create different things. We had different artists kind of teach different crafts here and the gallery. We had business topics, customer service trainings, and all of those different things that kind of help market ourselves as artists and out market our work to other people other than just the gallery itself. So that was a really cool thing that we had happened. PL: Yeah, they also taught us a digital marketing. Yeah. That's the one thing that we're lacking that we all know that we all need to learn how to do digital marketing. KQ: Yeah. Now most people aren't very confident in that. That was a lot of help for. Most people who are not well versed on the internet. Do you have any other examples? Wasn’t there a drawing workshop?  PL: There's a drawing workshop we did have. We hosted a jobbing workshop from SIPI. And the SIPI Board of Regents sent people over and then we hosted a drawing workshop here for the community. And along with that they also talked a bit about marketing online and that was a successful workshop. CG: Yeah, it turned out well we had about little over 10 to 12 people, including me and Tyrell, other than that we had a sales event on Mother's Day, which was kind of awesome. We didn't have all our people, but we've had one artist member from Albuquerque, Ian Paloma, all the way from Albuquerque to set up here. That was pretty cool it’s the first time I met him.

KQ: We're still keeping busy. So going on to the next section, which is the future. Question 17. What does your board need now to continue to grow prosper and become sustainable?  
(Laughter) KE: Money. PL: We need more members to come and help. KE: Oh yeah, definitely echo that same thing is I think one of the things that our members are kind of kind of getting something that we need to change with our membership is that originally when this Board was created, there was only a group of maybe 15, 16 people that started the whole cooperative. And once the original board was selected, which is still the same board that still is in place today, it kind of made it seem like whatever the board decides, the board has to do too as well. And at the very beginning, that was something that we were comfortable doing. Because we were so excited and wanted to see this go and we wanted to see this takeoff. But as the time kind of progressed along, I think one of the things we saw is definitely we see a lot of burnouts with our board members, because I believe our board members would do way too much. And not delegating a lot of that to our members. And so now as soon as we definitely need more help maintaining the facility, routing, the documents, the records, and just general overall gallery needs that we need to have happen. So, a lot of times when something needs to happen, they're all like, the board's going to do it. It's okay, the board's going to take it on, and the board's going to finish whatever we need to have done. But I think that's something that we definitely, I guess it kind of falls on us, because we kind of created that. I guess that thought process, then members figured that, you know, whatever the board decides they're going to do it anyway. So, we really don't have to do anything. But that's something we definitely need to have, as far as the change in mentalities that we all need to have our members come back in February, we put in some of the work that needs to happen. I think, I think one of the different factors that I saw as far as that when COVID hit or prior to COVID. You know, we've had members come in and volunteer regularly and working together or either greeting customers or cleaning or doing documents back here or just doing a lot of things that needed to happen. Once COVID hit, as far as the restrictions for gathering, I know we did take about a two-month break. And basically, the galleries were completely closed, no online sales or anything. Then once we reopened again, we wanted to keep our members safe. So, we said don't come to the gallery, you don't have to volunteer, because we don't want a big crowd, or we don't want it. We don't want people to get sick. So, there's like one person here maybe each day. But as we progressed, the law that just became the norm was much as we call artists to come back. They're like, oh, no, you told us to stay away. I don't know, it doesn't, I'm not trying to say that they've saying that. But it just kind of feels like they kind of got accustomed to just not having to do anything here anymore. And like the board's going to do everything. And so, we've been having a difficult time gathering all the members to have a member meeting. And I think that will definitely help so that we can hopefully bring back everybody and kind of go back to the same way we were with having members kind of volunteer and be here, be present, and kind of really see what's going on in the gallery here. But definitely moving forward we definitely need our members to assist with a lot of, not the decision making but actually putting a lot of those decisions into actions because when we make a choice or make decisions on something, a lot of times they don't happen, because there's nobody to kind of put that plan into action other than the board. But I think a lot of times you just kind of get to that point like is there anybody else that's going to help us? So yeah, I think we definitely need more help in initiating a lot of the decisions that have been made. KQ: That will help. Do you have anything more to say? PL: Well, when our business was flourishing, we had up to 32 paid members and now we're down to like 18 paid members. And now just two people are left at the shop. And it's just been CG and I the last three, four months, keeping this gallery open for everyone. And I wished and we keep calling people to come and help us and try to show off or what equipment and everything. But it's just hard for I guess, them to return back. And it's so difficult to or yeah to, or we wonder how we could call them back. So, if there's any way anybody has a secret, let us know. CG: Do you remember the events that we used to have? No, no, we, when we did events, we do have. We've been in stuff for beverages and food and stuff. So that keeps people happy and interactive during the similar group membership viewing sessions. KQ: So, more group events? Or Membership events I should say? CG: Yeah. 

KQ: So, (Question 18) would you say the member engagement is the same or worse? But the general membership I should say is the general membership needs is the same as the board needs, which is more engagement? KE: Yeah, I would say so. CG: Definitely could use. KE: I think communication again, has given kind of, not the best, between both the board and the membership, a lot of things to do have a Texan thread, or to kind of get updates, but that's not regularly happening. And then also having the members reach out to the board too, as well. So, it's not, I guess that's the thing is really trying to figure out the common, the middle point for all of us to really come back. And it's and the thing is, it's not the board and members were basically one whole group. And just trying to figure out what the best course of action would be for it to begin, I think COVID was definitely the thing that really kind of stopped a lot of that, thinking that COVID didn't hit it hit us the way it did and impact us the way it did, I think we would have been really flourishing to this point because we have major plans prior to COVID hitting and once that hit it kind of erupted, the stopped everything. And then we're just kind of little by little picking up those plans and ideas back up again. But just that disconnect that it created between the board and the members itself was really difficult and we're slowly trying to figure out a way to get to go back. PL: Yeah, COVID really hurt us when especially when they had to close down the reservation, and nobody was allowed in. And that was really bad for us until we all learned how to go on online and then we did have an arts Coop newsletter that we used to send out and you know that stuff was completely awesome. That stopped completely also. 

KQ: But yeah, definitely need some more. Going on to question 19 - If the Co-op has the effect that you hope for in the long run basically, what do you hope the Co-op would look like in like 5 or 10 years?  KE: Yeah, so again, I think as far as marketing definitely wants the coop to be kind of on the forefront as far as Yallane Tribe authentic art. Anybody looking for any authentic art for them to always think of Yallane Tribe artists cooperative here. Again, building those networking between artists. I think that's definitely something that has helped and has provided benefit for a lot of the artists So hopefully that we can create that network even bigger and have it grow more, having more participants. And I guess, really changing the mindset of how we do business with our art. And really having the artists take control of their market and create a, I guess the thought process of you know, they deserve what they deserve as far as when they create art versus, versus having somebody dictate how much their art is worth, that's something you definitely want to have happen. Again, just, I think a lot of it is just education. Because if you don't know, you don't know. And if you don't know, you feel like that's the only way it should be done. But once you kind of open up a lot of these ideas, and a lot of these business models and revenues and ways of selling art, I think it's just a good way to really have artists understand, you know, there are several markets out there versus the one that they depend on heavily. And so, I think that will be something that will benefit them more. We're not saying don't stop selling to galleries, but you know, having them have that opportunity to display their work in other places, could definitely benefit them. But I think overall 10 years from now, I hope we do or when people customers think Yallane Tribe art and authenticity in the art do you think of the cooperative want to buy directly from the artists? KQ: So, what would your hope be for the cooperative the cooperative’s effect on the team in the long run?  PL: CG, I hope as long as you and I are here the shop’s going to be open. I want our gallery to be prosperous for everyone, not just for just a few people, but I want it for everyone. So, everyone will get all the benefits that that the artists deserve. And yeah, I want our store to flourish. And I hope to continue to keep it open for everyone. And I invite everyone to come. KQ: Yeah, so let's hear your dream. CG: Actually, thinking about it, thinking about it for a while. I think that, you know, once space runs out here perhaps like yeah, like within five or 10 years, maybe we can extend from another cooperative gallery somewhere else in Albuquerque, Santa Fe, and maybe even here, another location in Yallane Tribe to make it more have more different, a whole lot more artists working for different locations, maybe even some Yallane Tribe artists living in Albuquerque can maybe even open a co-op.  They’re the same. The same names just it's just another location. The way that bigger cooperatives. The big companies the way that they extend their, their buildings you know, such as like REI, the outdoor supply store, they have different locations. So that's kind of what I'm thinking about that happened and you should definitely plan for something that would be cool. PL: Yeah, also to I think we should utilize the back area that we have. And I had it fixed up for the other fetish Carver's to work outdoors. Because I know that some of the carvers they do work outside instead of indoors because of all the dust that it produces. And so, if we could fix up a place in the back where the artists can work or a small seating area for the visitors that come. KQ: The studio artist’s studio? PL: Yeah, yeah. And have maybe a small area for the visitors themself to you know, actually sit down and we can, we can sell some small refreshments or whatever you know, that would really be good to maybe include local vendors to sell locally made food in coffee shops and make homemade doughnuts.

KQ: And then going on to the next Question 20, which is a question for all three of you again. What advice would you give your former self at the start of your cooperative journey, of your cooperative journey?  KE: Delegate, delegate, delegate. I think at the beginning, everything was just kind of a whirlwind of things happening so fast. I know when Cooperative Catalyst came in, they had like this plan of step 1 to step 200, whatever. And opening the gallery was way towards the end of that, but I think one of the things we wanted to do was, we had we saw this building, it was available it was vacant. People were interested, we definitely wanted to jump in. And we were able to get into this place. And so, I think we definitely jumped on a lot of steps to open up this place. But I think one of the things definitely taught myself was, again, make sure that you're not overdoing everything that you're not taking on too much. I think that's something we've definitely made a mistake on is that, I mean, personally, I would probably still do it because I was super excited. Having this organization startup, having this gallery opened up that we saw the potential of having a cooperative here and we saw the potential having something that belonged to us and so I think we definitely did put in that work would probably definitely do the same thing again, is the only thing I would say just have had more people put in the same model work as we all did, so that way it kind of makes it fair. Because I know once we get to that point of burnout certain things seem unfair, like why are we doing all the work type thing? But again, I think it was just because we saw the benefit of having something that belonged to us. But for sure, at the beginning I would do this all over again. Definitely putting this thing on work but I would say make sure everybody else is putting in that same work as margin as well. KQ: And we definitely didn't know COVID was. KE: Yeah, Yeah, definitely plan for the unexpected. KQ: What advice would you have for your former self? PL: Actually, when I went to the to the Catalyst appointment, I was on my lunch break from work doing my art and I was like, oh, there's a meeting and then I'm like, oh yeah, they have good snacks I'll go eat over there. So that's why that's the reason why I was there. But I got put onto the board and I wasn't too quite sure of myself if I would be able to do the job but once when Carlton taught me I was able to I understood what he was telling me and from there I just kept working and working and wanting to keep the shop open so I never gave up so I really that's all I can say. I just haven't given up yet so I want to work shop to our shop to be for everyone yeah well. Always happy and glad to be here and you know anybody asked me to help them I'm trying to help everybody try to involve everybody. Always inviting people even nonmembers I see up at the supply shops. I tell him about her shop and yeah and like what can you said delegate ask for help when needed don't do it yourself. CG: Don't really know. I know that signed up the member in the beginning trying to get as much artwork in here from everybody. Don’t know I did attend most I think that I should have taken on more tasks as a member. I’d advise myself to maybe be a little more than that.

KQ: Going on to the next section, which is the general business questions. Number 21. What is the cost current annual revenue? That's okay if you don't know the exact number just give like a ballpark. What would it be?  KE: Yeah. So right now, we're under $25,000. But I think pretty sure by the end of the year, we'll, you know, we haven't really had a full year, I don't think because we started in June, or first year and up to December. I know we did pretty good. I know we made close to $30,000. Within just that half a year. No. But then the following year. I think that's when we had some closures. PL: Yeah. January and February. Yeah.  KE: I think that's when COVID hit. Right. When did we open? PL: 2019. KE: Yeah. So that first year, we were planning everything because we're really gearing up. And then COVID. And then so that's kind of where ours, we never really had a full year open. Yeah. I think this this year, is probably our first year that we're going to really actually be open throughout the whole year, except. PL: We were doing online sales January, March, April. And wasn't in what month? Did we start coming? We were telling each other. Was it in end of February? KE: In 20? Yeah. CG: June or... KQ: June? CG: Yeah, it was like, June. KE: Last year was primarily online sales because the tribe or the village was still closed. So, this year is kind of more being open regularly, but very low inventory. So yeah, we're in the B category. I really have a really good feeling if we at full capacity with our members’ inventory. And not having that to deal with COVID. I'm pretty sure we were easily gotten to see possibly be in the D category but right now, we're at between $25,000 to $50,000. KQ: Would you guys agree? PL: Yes. 

KQ: Okay, so going on to the second one (Question 22), how does the coop distribute profits or funds to members?  KE: We haven't. I know, as far as our model that any x is, as far as at the end of the year that will be divvied up between the members. But the first year of our startup, we I think we kind of said that we'll give it a couple of years before actually distributing profits to members because we want to make sure that we'll be able to sustain ourselves for at least a couple of years before doing those profits. And so COVID definitely put a kink in it again. 2021, there wasn't really much profit. So, I don't think there was any profits distributed 2022 depending on how the rest of the year goes. We're already halfway through. And we haven't we really haven't done much profit this year. So, we still have yet to distribute any profits to our members. But one of the things that we were definitely going to do was distribute whatever profits to monetary compensation. So, we have all four as far as what that was going to look like. But one of the things that we were definitely going to do was distribute whatever profits to monetary compensation. So, we have the old formula as far as what that was going to look like. But we've never been able to initiate that because the two years startup that we wanted to do and then COVID hit again so we have yet to distribute any profits or funds to our members.

KQ: Question 23 what strategies does the coop use to raise capital? KE: We did do a GoFundMe page at the very beginning of the sectioning or the meetings of the cooperative planning. So, we had a GoFundMe because again, we wanted to move into this building. And so, I think that provided I don't know what to say close to $5,000 to $10,000 dollars.  Yeah, I think around that ballpark. And donations that we've seen from a lot of the artists had really good networks, as far as collectors or are enthusiasts. So, a lot of these people were able to, or were willing to donate. And so that helped us with the overhead of the gallery there. KE: Fortunately, we weren't, we didn't have to take out any loans or anything. The grant that we got from Kellogg really did, wasn't there to provide any financial assistance. As far as buying art or anything, it was just me there to help initiate the cooperative and creating a cooperative. So even though there was a grant there, we really utilize that money as a startup, because that's something that was part of their, their scope. So, a lot of it primarily was the donations that we received from the GoFundMe page. Tribal Main Street, I believe, also was a big financial supporter. As well as Ashford College was able to purchase some equipment for us that we utilized here in galleries. So those were there to help us with that. So, donations and other tribal organizations helped raise the capital we needed to move into here.

KQ: Okay, Question 24? Does Artisans Co-op have a budget? Yes or no? If so, how often do you look at it or revise it?  KE: So that’s PL’s side. PL: No, we don't have a budget. KQ: That only pertains to projects that we set up as a coop as a whole? KE: Yeah, we do have PL do a lot of the bookkeeping. But as far as I don't think we really necessarily set out a budget and adhere to a budget. A lot of times, when things need to happen, we kind of make the decisions there, right, or in a board meeting, say this needs to happen, or this needs to take place. And so, I think that's something as far as our organization that we definitely need to look into is creating a budget, maybe not for a whole year, but at least quarterly or so. So that way, it's a lot easier to see. We're not overspending the money that you do have. But yeah, as far as we do have a pretty good bookkeeping system with PL.  But as far as how much we budget ourselves, we kind of play it by ear, and hopefully, we're not overspending. PL: Monthly bills that I pay are usually consistent. So, they never either go up or down. So, it's usually the same costs every month. And we can be able to make a graph or whatever on QuickBooks if anybody wants to get it. We're interested in it or see how much money we have. And yeah, and what how the bills were paid, you can make some reports like that. KE: Awesome.

KQ: Okay, so I think that answers all the questions for that question. Number 25. And you mentioned Cooperative Catalyst of New Mexico as a cooperative developer. So, I think you already answered that question. 

KQ: Going up to 26. Did you do a feasibility study or business plan? KE: Yeah, I think that all Cooperative Catalyst came in and those were some of the meetings that we met with and developed a business plan. So yeah, we I know we do have one, I do know that it probably needs to be updated or revisited again and see what was on there again. But yeah, we did do one. But it's been a while since I've actually seen that. PL: Yeah, we should definitely look at it again.

KQ: Okay, going down to 27. Did you work with anyone else doing these things? Or did you do these things among your only your group members? Like I said, going through the feasibility study, creating the budget and raising capital. KE: Yeah. The college I know, at the very beginning, they were able to provide the bookkeeper for us. So, we did have a bookkeeper here on site for a good three months or so, I don't know how long. PL:  It'll be six months. KE: Yeah. But I think it was basically just for the installation of the bookkeeping system. And so, once that was done, that was all that the college was able to provide us to do system created. So, we were able to work with them. But now, it's primarily the members themselves. So, PL, again, along with Carlton, are the ones that do a lot of financial budgeting and the bookkeeping portion of it. 

KQ: And going on the 28th, which should be a new question. Do all your members have to be members of the Tribe?  KE: Yes. So that was one of the qualifications that we put on there was that they were enrolled in the Yallane Tribe. I know we did have to turn down a few people because they were not Yallane Tribe members. But yeah, that's one of the qualifications that we have.

KQ: All right. So going on to 29. Unless you guys want to add anything to that question. PL: What was that business class that we took? We got the letter. Yeah, I don’t know. I don't know what the name, we've got, what the company name was that he was from, but maybe come and teach us some business strategies. (Note: Question 29 was answered previously.)

KQ: Alright, so going up to number 30. What brought the community together to start the coop?  KE: So again, it was an individual, from Ashford college, he went to go visit some communities in Africa, we saw a women's basket weaving cooperative there, and had the idea of bringing the same business model here. There was an art organization prior to the artist cooperative, which was June Yallane Tribe Artwalk. And this was an artwork studio that people could go to. And that group of artists was basically the ones that kind of spearheaded this whole organization of the cooperative. So, I myself, CG, PL they're all part of the Artwalk, organization, doing different events in our community as far as sharing our arts in studio spaces, or, at that time, it was at the Visitor Center in sharing, giving more of a personal insight as far as how art is created. And from there, the individual from the college, brought that organization in and just kind of shared his idea of creating our artists cooperative, alone. Again, having that grant there, I think was something that definitely helped with the development because then the Cooperative Catalyst of New Mexico team and they were eager to show and educate us as artists of what artists cooperative will look like and being able to share a lot of information. So, they're having those meetings. And they're the artists of corporations, the bylaws and all of those things, and then being able to move into this gallery and then continue to meet regularly till the grant was done, and so that's something that that's how basically, we were brought together, as you're already an organization of our organization that consisted of the same artists, which was the Yallane Tribe Artwalk. They brought us in, gave us an idea, and that's basically where we were taken.

KQ: Okay, and number 31 and 32. I think we answered this. 

KQ: Okay. And so, moving on to number 33.  You chose to form a cooperative, how would you explain that to others?  KE: I think, again, is just basically what's that word cooperate together, building community. And like PL, she's always stressing, stressing is it's not just for an individual person, but it's for the betterment of the entire community. And I think that's just one mindset, we definitely want you to change is that, you know, it's better to work together than work against each other. And I think a lot of times, that's kind of what happens with these galleries is it creates competition. Because a lot of times, when you see artists, there's some very similar designs and very similar items that are created. And it's basically kind of pulling artists against artists, and to be able to create enough revenue to sustain your families. But for here, I think one of the things that we would definitely want to do was change that mindset. It's better to work together than work against each other. And so that's something that we definitely wanted to share and show and demonstrate how that is possible. And so, with the cooperator appear in the gallery, I think we're able to show me some of the people that do come to and be part of the gallery. How that is possible. But again, slowly trending slowly, hopefully, more and more people see that we definitely benefit our community as a whole. KQ: So yeah. would you guys like to add? PL: Yallane Tribe sort of always cooperated with one another. And that's how our reservation, Yallane Tribe, has been flourishing. And then this is yeah, a cooperative this, you know, all the people coming together to open up shop. And we're artists first, and then we're volunteers at the shop next. So yeah, we're all teaching learning together as we keep our gallery open. KQ: That's it. Caretaker. So, with your explanation we. Do in the past, it's very few and on… KE: Pretty much explained. Pretty well.

KQ: Okay, question 34. That one has been covered.

KQ: So, you guys had pretty much said the same thing. But we're almost done, guys. We just have a couple more questions. Okay, so I don't think we've gotten to the real details on this question yet. (Question 35) So how did you develop your marketing plan? How did you market? Did you utilize your website or social media marketing?  KE: Yeah. So, when we're still dealing with Cooperative Catalyst, I think that was one of the focusses that they kind of wanted to make sure we understand and created was a marketing plan. So, I do know they also brought in other people, I can't remember their names, but we kind of created a marketing plan. It very basic and very minimal, I don't think we really were able to really dive into it. I know, once we started moving on, we tried to create different departments, and one of them was the marketing department. And they were supposed to meet on their own at different times. But that didn't work out too well. But we do definitely utilize website, we definitely use social media. I remember through the Tribal Main Street, as well as the tourism office, they were able to provide advertisement in different magazines. I know what we were first starting. So, we were able to do that too. But we had a new product, which was the studio tour visits that we were getting ready to launch and we created a whole plan on how we were going to market that. And that was right before COVID hit we had everything kind of situated and everything cleared up. And then they came in kind of stopped everything. And that's something that we still haven't picked up and try to figure it out yet. But I do know we have a very basic marketing plan. We do utilize our website. And we also do social media. KQ: So, would you say the marketing plan was there from the very beginning? KE: Yeah, it was there.

KQ: My guess is that we've already pretty much covered everything that's in 36.

KQ: That's just to make sure so I don't kind of skip a skip over questions that SM would think of. Going on to the last few questions, which are (Question 37) do you have an employee handbook? Does your employee handbook offer untraditional leave? If so, yes, please subscribe it. Are there different rules that you have to follow on territory? So, what are they and how have you managed them?  KE: And we do have a member’s handbook. And this shows a lot of the policies and procedures that we have. And also, a lot of things important information that members should know. Operations are all on territory not off. KQ: I think that it seems like … KE: Yeah, I don't think we really operate off the reservation. PL: But we presumed we have to follow the Tribal religious customs and we have to close shop for four days for fasting.

KQ: So, we do follow the cultural, everything cultural, cultural, culturally doings. So, we've answered that one and the last one experiences and lessons. So, (Question 38) are there any other important questions or ideas about the coop that you think I should be aware of but didn't cover here?  KE: I think one thing, definitely to also know is all of the legal documents that needs to be in place to be considered a cooperative. I know at one point, our status as a cooperative lapse because of some documents that were not up to date with the state. Unfortunately, we’re able to go about getting those and being able to create those reports and fill out those forms. I think definitely something that we didn’t know about. Until we got some letters saying that our status as a cooperative was no longer valid. And so, we were able to we had to figure out what it is that we’re trying to do or figure out what we’re supposed to do. But I think just, I think those were some of the things as far as with the state of New Mexico, that was very difficult for us to figure out as far as what documents needed to be placed and where they needed to be sent, because I know there was one document that can kind of get bounced around, even know exactly where it needs to go. But I think a lot of those are some things that can tend to get overlooked was the legal status of becoming artists cooperative and all the forms and documents that needed to be placed and renewal those documents. I think it's yearly fee that we need to do to make sure that we maintain the status as an artist corporate to be legally recognized as a cooperative. KQ: PL, do you have anything else to add? PL: No.

KQ: Thank you guys, thank you so much for staying with me for such a long time to really think about are these things that we really haven't talked about.
