
Tue, 4/12/22 12:43PM • 1:25:22
Tom Hodgson, Many Nations Cooperative
SUMMARY KEYWORDS
cooperative, members, nations, business, people, community, indigenous, question, products, nation, board, organizations, industry, work, pay, surpluses, years, education, insurance industry, indigenous people
SPEAKERS
PS, TH, Sandy McMahon

PS  00:06
The southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute has been awarded a grant by the US Department of Agriculture, National Institute for Food and Agriculture. The subject area is a comparative study of citizen native and First Nation led cooperative development in the US and Canada, and an analysis of factors associated with the development, growth and challenges of those cooperatives. The goal of the proposed project is to better understand cooperatives when within the development and growth of these cooperatives or lack of it. Through the study, we seek to expand rural native business opportunities by identifying factors associated with First Nation cooperative growth and sustainability and sharing these with Native nations leaders and their citizens in the US and Canada. This project has been approved by  SIPI’s Institutional Review Board, all information gathered and analyzed will be de I identified as two individuals interviewed the name of the native lead First Nations lead cooperative or the host nation, unless the host nation gives us permission to share certain de-identified information for the benefit of other for native and First Nation communities. So, do you have any questions before we start?

TH  01:32
No, I don't think so. I'm ready to ready to dive in. 

PS  01:36
Okay, so the first question that I have is your cooperative profile. So, where's the cooperative located? And why?

TH  01:48
Okay, we're based out of Saskatoon. That's where our operations offices are. But we work with about  170nations, from British Columbia through to New Brunswick. We're located in Saskatchewan, primarily because one of the nations that really was key in the formation of many nations was Onion Lake First Nation, and they're there. They're based there their land, it straddles the Alberta Saskatchewan borders. So geographically, that's kind of where we started. That's where our roots are. But we've spread, we've spread out to a national basis.

PS  02:34
That's exciting. So, what is your and I need to have you say your name, 

TH  
No that’s okay

PS  
I apologize, your name and your position and role in the cooperative.

TH  02:46
Sure. So, my name is Tom Hudson. I'm the Vice President of Business Development for Many Nations. My role is... We're a smaller organization operationally. So, we'll wear a few hats, but my role specifically is to assist the coop in in growing and that's through the development of the cooperative itself and working with the board and in operating in a way that's consistent with our corporate values to product development to growing distribution. I've got a counterpart Gail Davidson, in our office, and she looks after the operations side of it, and she's based out of Saskatoon. I'm based out of Winnipeg, myself. So

PS  03:37
And then, how long have you been with the cooperative?

TH  03:42
I've been with the cooperative just over four years now.

PS  03:46
Yeah, and how many people in total are employed through your cooperative right now?

TH  03:52
We have about 10 staff that are directly employed, and then we work with approximately 20 independent advisors of in various regions across the country.

PS  04:05
Okay, and how many members?

TH  04:09
We have what 100. And oh, I should have I should have grabbed that number off the top of my head. We weren't going to 170 nations, but there's a few in there that uh, but 250 members.

PS  04:22
Okay. So, your members are all are all First Nations.

TH  04:29
Our members are all in indigenous organizations. So, in the context of that, that would mean First Nations, Many Nations off reserve, indigenous businesses that are owned and operated by indigenous people, as well as the northern communities.

PS  04:52
And is there any other relevant information that you'd like to share about the cooperatives

TH  05:03
I guess that depends on what your other questions are? I don't want to be repetitive. Yeah, there's lots I'll share with you, but maybe…

PS  05:11
How about if we go through some of the questions, and then we can figure it out from there. So, this first section is on kind of the background and environment? And are there examples of businesses that have been formed within your community? How were these formed? And how have they worked out? And what is the community's attitude towards these? So other types of cooperative businesses? 

TH  05:42
The, and you're probably going to have a better lens on this than I would just give some of the interviews you're doing and the different various people you're talking to, and Trista. Trista would probably be far better qualified to answer that question that myself she sees, worked for so many communities on that. I think from my perspective, I don't think the cooperative business model is well understood in general. And that's not limited to the indigenous population in Canada. But I think it's additionally unfamiliar as to what maybe some of the advantages are, for collective action for collective business opportunities within the indigenous communities. That's been my experience. But my experience is far more limited than some other people when it comes to other cooperatives. So

PS  06:39
That's a really good point, though, about the advantages of collective action, I think that does get overlooked. And it's something you know, just for me thinking about it that I need to pay closer attention to that, because that's where the real work began. So, we can get people to come together. How many? Okay. Have any cooperatives besides the cooperative, that you are currently a part of been formed within your community?

TH  07:25
Well, and that's where? Maybe that's why I struggled with your question before. We're not a single community, we're 170 communities. So, I would assume that some other communities have also adopted the cooperative business structure for certain endeavors. But we work with so many communities. I don't know. I wouldn't know how to answer that.

PS  07:54
Are there any issues in the community that you hope that the cooperative can help improve our resolve? So, speaking about your cooperative, I think would be a good way.

TH  08:07
 Yeah, I think. I think it's, it's there's a social side of it. And there's an economic side of it. I think, the clearest when I talk to people is looking at the economic side of it. We're a consumer cooperative. So as a consumer cooperative, not only do members control and have use over the wealth, and the assets itself. But any excess profits that are that come out of those operating activities, then accrue back to our members via patronage dividends, or they can choose how they want to use the surplus for the betterment of their communities in the way that they decide to. We have a member, democratically elected member on board as a corporation would. So, they determine how the surpluses are used. So, there's the economic side of it. So certainly, economies of scale, and in our industry, see, we're different than, say a consumer cooperative, that would be a grocery store that comes into a region that didn't have one and it's now providing a service that wasn't there before through people coming together. In the insurance industry, the barriers to entry are very big. So, we allow and not allow, we provide an opportunity for members to come together through our structure to enter into an industry that's got a large barrier to entry just due to size. So, anyone First Nation, even if even if they're larger, might struggle through economies of scale to be competitive with the non-cooperative, non-Indigenous businesses that are out there that we're competing against. But by coming together, collectively, in an industry such as the insurance industry, they have a much bigger voice on that. So, they can really leverage economies of scale, that's the economic side of it, and then a profit getting, you know, we are returning profits back to the communities we're keeping money in. So that's the economic side of it, the more social side of it comes down to for example, in the insurance industry, it's primarily non-Indigenous. So, there's really not a lens in the insurance industry in general for meeting the needs, specifically of indigenous people in Canada.

TH  10:44
So, coming together and having a bigger collective voice to make sure the products are more culturally relevant, for example, building features into the plan that meet the needs of indigenous people, as opposed to help sort of the insurance companies and sort of think inside of a box, right. So, we're able to do a lot more of that. So, we've been able to really modify our products and create some new products that didn't exist before. Because we've got the collective strength of everyone coming together and deciding this is what they want to do collectively. So, there's certainly that side of it. The other side is quality of services and transparency. Again, it's, it's an industry that maybe doesn't lend itself well, to transparency, that it can get very technical, it could require some expertise and, and for a layperson, even an educated layperson, they might not understand or have the ability that they would have the ability to understand, they wouldn't have the expertise to understand some of the intricacies that go into underwriting and underlying management fees and those types of things. So, through the cooperative, they are cooperative, they employ their own experts to do that for them. So, they're, they're gaining trust in the system, because they're employing the people that are looking out for their own best interests. So as opposed to working with an independent for-profit broker, who really at the end of the day, yes, they do want to provide you with a good product and keep your business but they're in it to make money. So, and hey, there's nothing wrong with making money, but it's not always done in the most transparent way. So, there's transparency in the process, there's trust in that, there's trust in the system. And, and I guess, thirdly, kind of related to the Social, I'm not sure that's the social side of it, but it's a service side of it, on the social side of it, and this maybe goes back to some of the roots of many nations is it's with sort of a guiding principle of self-determination and being able to not having to rely on outside sources for certain things. And, and insurance was certainly one of them that back in the 90s, the insurance companies and the brokers that they used, weren't really that great with First Nations, they provided terrible services and charged too much money. And it was it wasn't good. So, groups like Onion Lake and a few others got together and said, hey, you know what, we're going to start doing this ourselves. And but we're going to do it collectively on that, so. So, it's transferring knowledge, and it's transferring, it's transferring wealth. To a marginalized community, I think that's the best way of doing it. And, and, you know, it's one of those things where it's the barriers to entry are so great in the insurance industry, and we're not an insurance company. But the barriers to entry are still quite large. That if your starting point is marginalization, it's not easy. So, you need to come together collectively. And by coming together collectively, and agreeing on a way of doing things, that's fair and democratic, and equitable, that you can do big things. And I think that's really what, what we're so proud of in terms of what we've been able to do.

PS  14:19
That's such an excellent point. Because it's hard to explain equity to people outside of our communities, or what equity is or is not in our communities. And some of the things that I've said to people is, you know, that our federal government uses the word underserved and marginalized. And I've always believed it was very intentional in its design. And I feel like we've been intentionally overlooked, you know, so, but that is such a good point. And I think you actually answered this other question. It said, are there any issues the cooperative is helped to improve or resolve. And I, if you don't agree, I felt like what you said when you answered the question before you covered that point so eloquently, especially about the social, but also about the you know, talking about having insurance that now is available on Indigenous lands. That is, you know, and its economy of scale. But you know, just the things that you're talking about the transparency, the transfer of knowledge and wealth, self-determination. So, I don't know, if you wanted to say anything else, I don't want to shut you off. But do you feel that there any issues the cooperative has helped to improve or resolve with the people that you're serving?

TH  15:52
I think that probably does summarize that pretty well, I think, to just restate that we've built better product. We've been able to build better products that then were available in the market previously, and more culturally relevant products we have delivering better services. So that it's a better product, and it's used and delivered in a better way. And there's an economic benefit that wraps around that returning money back to the communities that would have left otherwise. And overall, there's sort of the guiding principle of just trying to have more of an effect on the industry. And I think the last thing that I'll say on this as an example of that, just this year, at our last two board meetings ago, actually, so would have been late last year, the board approved the establishment of an education fund, where 5% of our surpluses are going to be used to growing the number of indigenous people in the insurance industry. And that's not just within many nations that's within the industry in general. And it's a very broad brush. But whatever we need to do to support indigenous people entering the insurance industry, whether it's underwriting, whether it's service, whether it's sales, whether it's customer service within the insurance companies, because there is a lack of that lands within those organizations, and we are a voice, but we are an external voice to the industry that really guides how it all operates. And the cooperative is going to allocate a good portion of its surplus to try and have an effect on the industry itself by increasing the indigenous workforce within the insurance industry itself. So that lens becomes internalized. So that's just it's all related, but maybe in a bit of a different level, right? Because it's not about making money. It's of no, it's not a direct benefit to our organization or our cooperative. It's an indirect benefit to us through Bennett to try to change the industry. So

PS  18:07
I really liked that. Were you involved in the cooperative startup?

TH  18:14
No, I wasn't. We've been around for a long time. We started in 1990. As a not for profit. It ran as a not for profit to until 2009. The intent was always to start as a not for profit for whatever reason. And again, that was before my time with the intent of making it a cooperative, but I think that it was a challenge for a number of reasons for the board and the members at the time. And it kind of was running while it was working. So, it ran that way for a while. But in 2009 they formalized it as a cooperative. So, it it's been running as a cooperative, as opposed to a not for profit since 2009. No, I've only been there for four years. So, I used to compete against many nations in my former life. So, I've been familiar with the company from the other side. But yeah,

PS  19:11
So maybe some of these questions. I'm not quite sure. How with these questions. Um, I don't know. I'm wondering, Sandy. I have a question. Because I haven't come up with an answer. Okay, I'm talking about the cooperative startup. He wasn't he wasn't involved in the beginning. So, I'm wondering if I asked those questions or do I just leave them out?

Sandy McMahon  19:49
I think that would be the way this is designed. I think, probably 6, 7, 8 what you might do is say though you weren't involved in the actual startup itself, or can you enlighten us at all on some of these questions? 

TH  20:10
No to the history so I can't do,. my bad.

PS  20:13
Okay. So, in light of that, that you were not a part of the startup. Yep. Do you have any information about did like about the steering committee? How did it mold the cooperative around tribal values and principles?

TH  20:29
That's a very good point. And I can answer one part maybe a little more clearly than the other. Well, I can probably answer both. And I'm speaking there. I've had many conversations one, the chair of our financial services board, for the company, his name is Joe Carter. And Joe was one of the founding members of the cooperative. So, I've spent quite a bit of time with Joe, over the past four years, and I've heard some of his stories. So, I'll really, really what I've heard from Joe and that's he was he's first person on this so on that, although you're getting it second person in terms of the formation of the cooperative itself, Joe was the education director for Onion Lake First Nation back in the in the late 80s, and 90s. And Onion Lake First Nation was having trouble receiving transfer payments and didn't feel that we're getting the quality of education they deserve for their youth, on the Nation. So, they took it upon themselves to have that changed over so that the Nation took over their education system and ran it themselves. And that was long time ago, which was ahead of it's a little bit ahead of its time, in terms of some of the things we're seeing going on today. Joe was instrumental in working with Onion, like to do that back in the late 80s, early 90s. And out of that experience of saying, hey, we don't need to just be the receiver of what people are prepared to give us that we can empower ourselves to, to do things ourselves, if we all decide that's what we want to do. And he took that mentality and saw some of the challenges that the nation was having on their group benefits and their pension plan. And use that philosophy mentality and transfer that to sort of the seed of what started the cooperative. And then, you know, there were a few people that were instrumental that Joe got on board and, and that's what sort of started the not-for-profit side of it that formed into the cooperative. Joe is has always been clear in any conversations I've had with him and numerous ones that he feels and felt at the time that the reason that it should be a cooperative, and why he saw it as being a cooperative right from inception, even though it wasn't for a while was that the cooperative structure in terms of its in terms of its functionality, Joe felt was very much in line with indigenous values of, of sharing, that the community shares amongst itself for the benefit of the community. And at that level, I think it really resonated with a lot of individuals from a cultural perspective. On that side, so I'd say that's, that's, that's probably as deep as I could go on it. Maybe not as deep as you'd like, but that's probably about as deep as I should go. 

PS  23:31
No, but that is, you know, I know from the work that we do here in the US. We're trying to practice economy through our own lens again, and not what has been forced on us, but what we know, has worked, and worked for millennia before contact. And so, I understand that that economy, that sharing economy, is still alive and well in our communities. And if it hadn't been, we would have been in a lot worse shape, all of us, you know, even with the high poverty levels, that has saved us having that sharing economy and that way of thinking, you know, to up to help one another. So, let me ask you this, do you know, you know, from a historical standpoint, do you know if the if they use standard cooperative development approaches to meet the needs of the community when they first started out?

TH  24:35
That I don't know. Okay.

PS  24:39
Okay. And then how were community assets identified and used to form the cooperative.

TH  24:45
Well, in our context, there was no there were really a lot of startup costs the way because We're not a bricks and mortar thing, right? So that it wasn't, it really was, okay, everyone's going to agree we're going to we're going to set up a cooperative now I think at the time probably Onion Lake footing the bill for setting up some of the legal, you know that they were kind of instrumental in kind of saying okay you don't fit needs X number of dollars to get the legal framework set up and to get all this in place, I think they did that as a loan, if I recall correctly. But after that I mean it's a $5 member share to join the cooperative that the asset that the client that the member brings is their business. Because their business generates a revenue stream and creates an asset by working through the brokerage so. And that then allows us to hire the people to do it. So, it does that answer your question.

PS  26:01
Yes, yes, I have a question just because I'm trying to, because I'm not from Canada. And so, I'm real fluent in what we do here, you know, as a tribal citizen of my own nation. So, when you're talking about the $5, membership, the member's share to join. And really the real asset they that they bring in sir business are these like, here in the US, we call them tribal enterprises. They're run by the tribe. And I know in Canada, there are certain regulations and laws up there where individuals can't start businesses on reserve land, it usually is off reserved land for them to own a private business, but the tribal government is the owner. And if I'm misstating, that please correct me. But so, are you talking about when they when that when a tribe joins their member, or the nation joints, their membership fee is $5? But what they're really bringing is all their enterprises? So, I'm assuming that would be like their education systems, housing? Am I what you're saying?

TH  27:12
Yeah. So in for each First Nation there, they would have a number of different organizations, they would have never different employer groups, maybe that's okay. You might have the band office, you might have a treatment center, you might have to school. You know, there's various separate enterprises, and some of them are federally funded through the government. Some of them are funded are run by the nation as, as private enterprises. They're for profit for the nation on that, so but they're you're right, they're owned by their own by the nation. themselves. So, each one of those enterprises would go would fall under the First Nation typically. So yeah, so to be a member, the first nation would join. They bring their benefits under many nations, and they pay for their $5 membership, which is it has to be something legally to have them be an actual owner that just so the $5 is more it's a nominal amount, but it's to create the legal relationship. And then they are they receive all of the benefits that every other member has, there's no, there's no restrictions on a new member, they're treated the same as a member that's been there for 20 years on that side, and they and they have immediate access to benefiting from the greater asset of the cooperative and how it's used and can participate democratically in our governance structure. So, getting a little off on you there.

PS  28:52
No, no, no, that's perfect. So. I know that you said this before. But how did the products or services offered by the cooperative reached the market previously?

TH  29:05
Before us, there were insurance companies had brokers aid slash agents that would go out and solicit business from First Nations and the various organizations on which still occurs today. Outside of us, we do have a lot of competition, we're in a highly competitive environment as a cooperative, which is a challenge. But that still does occur today. But we're, you know, it's interesting that you what that makes me think of and, you know, I I'm constantly as, as a cooperative, and for anyone that's worked in the corporate environment now for a little while, understands that you're constantly having to explain yourself and the value in it, like why a cooperative, we're like, okay, here we go. If I look back at what the industry looked like, because I did work in the industry, with First Nations prior to joining many nations, and I have for 20 years So, I worked on the other side of the coin. From this now we, we were, we were, we were a better one out there, there's lots of sleaze out there, we weren't one of those. But at the same time, we weren't an indigenous company. And, and we saw the challenge there to what many nations has really been able to do aside from, you know, the four things we talked about earlier from, you know, better products, better services, transfer of wealth and, you know, influencing the industry is where a check and balance in the whole system and because we're they're doing things in the best interests of our members, as a people centered company, not a profit centered company. Everyone else has to up their game, they can't get away with what they were getting away with before. So even though now we're kind of, you know, from a pure product standpoint, it's a bit of a bag of flour for, you know, we've got some special things, but the competition's copied us and do things. And that's just the way things go. But I know that in the absence of organizations, like many nations, without that check there, things would slide again. So, it's important that we exist from that perspective alone. It keeps the industry honest, because members are doing it themselves, and you can't pull the wool over their eyes. And it forces everyone else to play at the level that we're playing at. And, and, and to match it. So. Anyways, again,

PS  31:31
no, that's, that's excellent. Now, let me ask you this. And I know, you've probably already answered it. But did that work? Or was that value set by others?

TH  31:44
Was it set by elders?

PS  31:46
No others? You know, like, how are the, you know, how the products or services offered by the cooperative? How did they reach the market previously? So, then the next question is, did that work? Or was did that work? Kind of like what was happening previously? Or was that value set by others about the way that this came into how it was how it transferred into the market previously?

TH  32:15
Yeah, so how the products went into the market previously didn't work. There was predatory pricing, there's poor service, and there was price. I said the predatory pricing, predatory pricing, and poor service. And really, quite honestly, there was a lot of discrimination in across multiple levels within the industry of indigenous business was considered bad business. And if anyone did do it, then you paid for it. And whether you should or not, didn't, didn't matter. That that was that was that was the environment that this that many nations were born out of. And so, it was delivered, a lot of people wouldn't deliver it. Now. It's very competitive. The products were poor, now the products are better, the pricing was uncompetitive, and now it's competitive. And the rates that the advisors charge to perform their services was very predatory. And now it's not. So, I think it was a very bad environment that it was born. Yeah. So, to answer your question,

PS  33:25
yes. Yes, you . are so good at this, that the next section is on values and community, do you have a sense of how you or your culture influenced the cooperative? And the kind of the sub question under that is, do you feel that your indigenous native identity has influenced this cooperative

TH  33:51
The, the board, the board influences the cooperative, I think that's maybe there the rest I don't I don't sit on the board. So, the rest of us are, that are employed by the cooperative, we're there to execute the vision of the board. So, the board has a heavy influence in terms of how they view things because they're our board is 100% indigenous board. They are looking at it not only through the lens as an indigenous person, but they are also looking at it from a customer and the receiver of a product standpoint. So, they're kind of seeing both sides of it and . they have to balance the objectives of the cooperative with the needs of themselves as a client right I mean, it's there's . always that never ending balancing act of you know, it's .Yeah, yeah, you have to find you have to find equilibrium and those two things in order for it to work, and they bring and have always brought the indigenous lens to how the companies structured the types of products that we offer the features of those products that we offer, the level of services that we provide. And the level of transparency like we, we spend, as an example, we spend, probably a disproportionate amount of time educating our clients compared to our competition. Because we want our clients to understand we want them to understand how the products work, how best to use them, make sure everybody knows we, you know, we also understand that in, you know, many of the clients that we work with that it's a political environment, people change, and there's high turnover sometimes. And you have to be there as you have to be there as you know, not only for them as a client, but as an owner, like we work for them. So. So again, it's maybe some . nuances and challenges that some of the First Nations we work with, have that maybe nonindigenous organizations don't have as much of I mean, they don't have any, but it's . so making sure that we're spending the time necessary to do those things. Well, coming from the board is very much looking at what the needs are of indigenous organizations versus non indigenous organizations or bringing that lens, the way that our patrons, dividends are allocated on a proportionate share the board really, messages quite often amongst themselves and externally that that is very much in line with the indigenous cultural values, historically of communities share it and along those lines, so it's the board, that is the lens they look through. So, they have a heavy influence on that. Yes.

PS  36:50
Are there any? Are there any issues between the coop and the local community? I mean, how has that worked? You know, and when I think of local community, I'm thinking of off reserve, you know, so, you know, how, how is this band, between your co-op, and I'm going to say, local community would probably be the other insurance vendors and brokers and agents.

TH  37:17
Yeah, it's probably better, it's better today than it was 20 years ago. Okay, I think that there's a lot less

TH  37:32
the right word for its escaping me with it, there's a lot less. Looking down, so to speak, maybe that's not the right word, right, we're looking forward. But on sort of what we're doing and our organization, I think the relationship is, is good, we've, we actually rolled out a program called The Friends of the cooperative, to try and encourage non-Indigenous businesses to work with us now, they can't be cooperative members, but we do a fantastic job, we would do a great job on anybody's group insurance or pension, not just indigenous First Nation and pension. Like we're really good at what we do. So, we, you know, we've been trying to partner and encourage the non-Indigenous sector to start doing some work with us and support us and, and I'm not sure how familiar you are with the Truth and Reconciliation Commission here in Canada. And so those TRC number 92 Is the call to action there is requesting corporate Canada, the non-Indigenous corporate Canada to seek ways to work with and partner with indigenous people in organizations. You know, all else, all else being equal, right, and, you know, those types of things. So, we've been trying to we've been working with in various capacities there. We do very little business with nonindigenous company. So still to this day, but so maybe that says more than my words.

PS  39:00
No, that's but that's really. So, I have just a quick follow up. When you talk about friends of the cooperative, is that them kind of making financial contributions? Are they like if they become a friend or an ally of the cooperative? Can they benefit from your insurance products? Or is it just making a capital? goodwill gesture towards the cooperative thriving more?

TH  39:30
It's twofold. The first is they can receive as good if not a better product than they're purchasing today from another broker. And number two, when they work through many nations, they can't be a member owner. So, they won't none of the benefits of the cooperative accrue to them. But they're redirecting their broker profits that they were paying out to an outside organization, into the cooperative. So, the profits that we make off of doing business with them get returned back to the communities in the form of patronage dividends. And it allows us to increase our economies of scale. So, they're, they're helping return money back to the communities and helping capacity build within the communities. And all they have to do is to choose to do business with an indigenous broker versus a non-Indigenous broker. It doesn't cost them anything.

PS  40:22
Wow. That is awesome. I mean, what a great now, so they, they're, they're a friend. They pay a membership fee, but they're a non-voting member,

TH  40:36
they wouldn't be a member at all. They're just straight clients through our brokerage. Okay. They would we would they would receive some recognition that they're supporting the cooperative. I mean, okay. Everybody, everybody, regardless always has it, what's in it for me? Peace to them? Right. So yep. So, if they need a little bit of recognition that they're supporting an indigenous business and doing some good, which they, which they are, we're happy to provide that. But beyond that, there's, there's no, there's no to them. It's just where do I purchase my product? And if I can get as good a better product over here, then why wouldn't she right, because you can do some good with it.

PS  41:15
Well, I really love this, that this idea that you guys what you've come up with, because that is a great way for people to especially people that may be played a big part in in the extractive economy of our indigenous communities, to be able to redirect their the profits that they would never get anyhow, you know, from buying those services, that that's one way that they're giving back to a community and acknowledging that, you know, the giving back,

TH  41:45
and I think corporate Canada, especially, and maybe not the large, the large companies, I mean, I think they've got the resources to kind of find some strategies and path to success to meet the TRC is called ACTION 92. But I think when you get into small and medium sized businesses, I think, even if they want to be supportive of the calls to action, the calls to action to be fair, don't tell them how to do it. Yeah, They just say go support them, and they're going to go, okay, I'll support them, and then they're going to go out what does that mean? So, we're also providing a very direct path to achieving that, that that is something that every business that's out there buying these products now can choose to do simply by choosing who they're doing business with. So, so it provides a little bit of clarity in the context of what we can control, right? Like, we're one little piece of a very big world, right. But we can offer a path in this one area of someone's business. And I think that's where non-Indigenous businesses need to look and say, okay, well, where are my opportunities to support the calls to action and, and then doing something about? So anyway? So that's a bit of an aside. But

PS  42:55
I think that this this last question, this group of questions, it's probably been answered a couple of times, but some indigenous communities use cooperatives to really reinforce traditional systems and values of Native nations and First Peoples. Is that the case here?

TH  43:20
Yes, it is. And I'll give you an example of I'll give you an example of that. That's very specific. Because a lot of the time, you know, if I think outside of this specific example, it's maybe hard for me to translate that into a direct action. It's easy for me to say yes, but how do I how do I illustrate that? So, I'll give you an example. When I when I started many nations, one of our board members, Darlene Little Bear, came to me and spoke with me and said she's, she's had this idea for a number of years. And could I help her with it, because we've heard from a number of members that this was important to them. So, in Canada, with the insurance plans that companies buy, you can get coverage for your drugs and your dental, you can go to the chiropractor, you go to the massage therapist, you can go acupuncture, you can you know you can get glasses, you can do all those, all those very mainstream things are all covered. But a large portion of the employees that work for the employers that that we are with practice traditional ways and traditional ways of healing to them are very different than Western based traditional ways. Whether it's ceremony receiving medicine, seeking elder counseling, which are so far outside the box of insurance companies, they don't they don't cover any of that stuff, right. So, we started to go down that path and it was a really interesting path. We approached the insurance companies, and they all do didn't know what to do with it and couldn't handle it. We ended up partnering with a company out of Alberta that that was willing to go down that road with us and sort of say, how are we, okay? We don't know what you we don't know quite what you want, but we want to support you. So, we built a product and called the traditional wellness spending account. And what it does is it tries hard to walk a line between an area that needs to be recognized and validated by the insurance industry as valid, an appropriate way of healing in various ways outside of, you know, pharmaceuticals, and chiropractors and acupuncture. But at the same time, needs to be respective of the cultural practices of not monetizing a cultural practice. So, it's, it's a very challenging line to walk. So we developed a relationship with a company that can facilitate the monetary side of it, we also spent a couple years working with nations to develop a process that provided a balance between providing some monetary reimbursement, but making sure that they're the receiver of the healing in whatever form that takes traditionally has some skin in the game and is making contributions that was important with all the elders that we spoke to that it can't just cover the cost of it, that's not the point. It's, so it really was designed to provide a lot of flexibility. And we would work with each nation individually, to design a structure of eligibility and how it works, the mechanics that are in the world that we live in, in a way that works for them, in particular, because we work with as, as our name states, many different nations, right? So you can't assume that the nation that we're working with in British Columbia is going to have the same cultural perspective is the Inuit community that we work with in the north, or that it's going to have the same cultural perspective as the community and the nation that we work with in Ontario, that even amongst the communities, we have to be careful not to say, oh, all the nations are the same. They're not. There are nuances. And there's differences, and we need to be respectful of all of our members on that side. So, number one, it was a member driven product. Number two, it was specific to, to meeting a cultural need, and to promoting cultural values within the communities. partly by offering it as a as an option, but also to invalidating it as, it's just as important. And it's just as valid as all these western based things that your employer pays for right now and encourages people to practice more traditional ways to seek healing and wellness in the way that works for them. So, I give rambling on that kind of stuff. So, I'll stop there. But that's maybe a really good example of taking a need at the board level, in terms of a concept of how we do this, in an industry that doesn't get us to bringing a product to the market that, admittedly right now, it's probably still the 1995 version of a cell phone, and it's kind of clunky, but we got to start somewhere, right, you have to take that first step. And that's kind of what we've done with it. And, and as we go further into it, it'll become an iPhone at some point, but you have to start somewhere. So that's  kind of where we're at with it.

PS  48:31
Well, I, I'd like to ask some more questions on that, because that one really intrigued me. And here in the US, not every nation, but through, we have the Indian Health Service. So, we have clinics on our We on our reservations, we have them in the urban areas that's through that Indian Health Service. So, a lot of these tribal communities have been, they allow for a traditional practitioner to be present at the clinic, so that people can make an appointment to see that person. And I was speaking with Sandy before the call today. So, I'm really intrigued, especially, you know, even though you're calling this something clunky, how you were able to work. And so, is this like a true? We have something here in the US and again, I'm trying to draw similarities and but is this like a health savings account? That they're that they're contributing to?

TH  49:28
It's, it works on the mechanics of it underlying it. Yes. We would call it like a healthcare spending account.. So, it's mechanical, you submit a claim an administration fee gets added to it. They adjudicate it and they pay the claim. It's not an insured product, and then the employer would pay for whatever claims go through based on limits that they've set in it. That's how it works here. So just make sure that we're talking to same thing,

PS  49:57
because we have we have something Here in the US called Health Savings Accounts. And so, it's something that you can contribute to, but it could only be spent, you know, it could be part of your insurance policy, but you contribute money. And then that money goes into a special account. It's here in the US, it's held at a bank, usually that handles health savings accounts, that money is nontaxable. So, it's like the money that you put in there, out of your income, it reduces that taxable contribution, it reduces your income by the amount that you contribute to the plan. I hope I'm saying this correctly. But then that money we had had to be spent on health care. But it was it still didn't handle traditional health care. And, and one of the things I was sharing with Sandy before the call today is that when you go to a traditional person to be doctored, there's a lot that goes into that appointment, you know, you depending on your nation, you know, and I can speak about mine, we bring a gift of tobacco or corn that we give to that, that practitioner, we bring other gifts as well, usually, because those people there, their home is always full of people. So, you bring food for them. Because they're always feeding people, you bring coffee, you bring toilet paper, laundry, soap, all those kinds of things. So, there's a considerable expense, if you are treating that person with the respect that they deserve. And I something that I do that not everybody does is I always give them a little cash because we don't live in traditional homes anymore, that you know that we have to pay a house, we have to pay homeowners insurance, we have to pay a mortgage payment, you know, our war ponies take gas now. So, you know, there's costs and there's some people they think, well, I'll bring you a Pendleton blanket. Well, I've I know, one elder that passed away a few years ago, he had three storage units full of blankets. And the and the man lived, you know, actually almost in poverty. And he helped so many people through his lifetime. And but because people have this thing about you don't give money to a traditional health of traditional practitioner and, you know, there's a psychology, that's a part of that treatment that we get when we go to our, you know, to our own people. So, I love this concept that you guys have created, that you can support people pursuing that kind of health because when you think about acupuncture, and even chiropractic, chiropractic years ago was kind of voodoo, you know, with a lot of insurance companies wouldn't even cover it. And you know, and even acupuncture now, you see more and more here in the US where they do cover it. And so that would have been considered untraditional health care healthcare very much so outside of the western model of you know, when in doubt, cut it out, or, you know, give them tons of pills, and create a whole other host of problems. And so, I really, I mean, when I look through all of your product lines, I just thought, oh my gosh, you guys have really spent a lot of time really being very careful about what's the best for the communities that you're serving, but also letting the community be part of the design and their unique culture.

TH  53:37
The community drives the design and game a cooperating member centered people centered. That's the way it should be in our, I’d be happy to talk with you offline to you about the traditional wellness stuff. I mean, I didn't get justice there, in terms of there was for years of working through nuances of meeting with elders meeting with stakeholders talking with meant, you know, other members of trying to figure out how to walk this line and be flexible enough to walk it in a few different ways. I'd be happy to if you want to talk about it. And 

PS  54:16
I would love to talk with you another time via email,

TH  54:19
Anytime drop me an Email I'd be happy to share 

PS  54:26
Last bit of questions that I have for you is can you share? How do you keep the community? So, the community when I'm talking about community here, I'm talking about your members, you know, how do you keep the community and the tribal leadership of that community engaged in this cooperative?

TH  54:45
Yeah, that that is the biggest challenge probably for most cooperatives is membership engagement. And in consumer cooperatives, it's probably even a bigger challenge. You know, at the end of the day as a consumer cooperative Well, we think we're very important. I mean, there's nations are dealing with a lot of issues and challenges. And there are many lines on their income statement of which we're a very small one. So. So yes, engaging is tough. So, we've taken we communicate regularly. I mean, that's, that's, I think, a strategy everybody every cooperative has to do. Each of our each of our members has, because our members aren't people are members or organizations. So, organizations have an authorized representative. And we do communicate regularly and engage with them. Surveys are a good one, get feedback, gauge, the temperature, sort of awareness issues, that kind of stuff. We have quarterly board meetings at a board member level, so the n plus an AGM on that we hold our elections every three years. Every three years, we hold pre COVID We, you know, I went around the country. But last year, we did a zoom when we had our elections, but we held regional meetings with all the each of the regional sets of authorized representatives and had a good discussions and chatting and the representatives elected regional delegate and regional delegates go into our AGM and elect in from amongst that population, our board members so that that cycle occurs every three years, but we communicate regularly with our, with our authorized representatives, at each of our member level. But probably the single biggest thing that really matters at the end of the day is demonstrating value. It's fine to say all the wonderful things about a cooperative, but at the end of the day, you need to deliver on those things. And I'm not talking just from a business perspective, I'm talking, you need to be able to demonstrate that you're delivering the objectives of the cooperative as we outlined earlier, those objectives were so things like the Education Fund, things like the traditional wellness spending account, the creation of that product. You know, we've added features into our group insurance product that include adopted by custom, for example. So, if you're adding independent onto the group insurance plan, doesn't need to be a government approved legal adoption that, you know, quite often aunties and uncles are bringing up their nieces and nephews, and they are the primary caregiver. But there's not a legal documentation that says that's the case. Insurance companies won't let them include them as dependents, but we will. We design our plans in that kind of way. So, we're able to demonstrate value on those things. And I think that's in terms of engaging members, really communicating the things that we're doing that are consistent with our corporate values and our cultural values. is the best way for us to engage our membership. You kind of have to, you have to walk the walk, right?

PS  57:59
Oh, those are really good points. Can you? Can you share an example of how you know of how your members or your you know, you know, I know, you said that your members aren't people their organizations have how they collaborate with the cooperative? 

TH  58:20
Sure. While there are groups of people, I don't, I don't want to I don't want to sell our corporativism people centered, it is very much people centered, but they're there we work through. The employer makes the purchasing decision on behalf of its employees. Right. So, there's people at the employer level and there's people with the employees. Can you say the question again, I’m?

PS  58:41
okay, can you share examples of how the I'm going to the word that we had here was how the community collaborates with the cooperative. And so, I think yours is really distinctly different than the question that I'm asking because yours is really, how do your members how do they collaborate with the cooperative because it is, this is a different, I'm trying to adjust my questions to meet the needs of how you're delivering services.

TH  59:11
Appreciate that. The collaboration it's  really by making sure that there's lots of dialogue. So, you know, talking whenever we're talking with our members, it's not just you know, rah, rah, rah, rah co-ops, it's, you know, how are things you know, what's working for you? What isn't? Or there's some things you'd like and, and so really, we're able to sort of get consensus through certainly conversationally from people and bring that back and we will also we will communicate that to the board and say, here's what we're hearing. Here's what our members are saying. Last year, we did a large member survey. gauging, you know, gauging the awareness of cooperatives gauging satisfaction with the cooperative gauging, you know, seeking any questions and feedback for things that they like from the cooperative that we aren't doing. So, it really creating that dialogue is because we work with so many, you know, we're not a big, we're not we're not big in terms of our staff, but to try to coordinate the needs of 170 members that are spread out across the entire country, that all have slightly different lenses is a challenge for sure. So, lots of communication, lots of dialogue and trying to continually find new and better ways to do it. So, for example, we, we applied for and got a grant this summer for one of our indigenous staff members to get a social media accreditation. So again, so we're not constantly paying some outside firms to do that kind of stuff, we wanted to, you know, we're trying to adapt to COVID a little bit here, too, right, we have to do things a little bit differently, we can't be as face to face. So, we applied for grant received some grant funding trained up one of our staff members. And so, we're really trying to increase the dialogue through better use and a different use of social media, for example, on that side, so just trying to find new and better ways of communicating and receiving communications and listening, listening is the key to it. All right, it's, we have to listen to what our members are saying and then integrate that in with our plans.

PS  1:01:32
So, here's a no, I'm going to go into kind of like future, I probably have about another, I would say, do you have another 15 minutes? 20 minutes that we can talk? Are you okay with that? All right. Um, what does your board need now to continue to grow, prosper and sustain this cooperative?

TH  1:01:57
Good governance and continued good governance. Good governance doesn't just happen. And it's not static. So, I think that is of key importance is making sure our governance structure is good, and is adaptive, and applied and flexible. To meet our members’ needs. And education, I think. Yeah. Especially in the case of a consumer cooperative. I think, and this is where we work with Trista’s cooperatives, first a lot is engaging them in governance courses, and those types of things and making sure that our board members have a resource to educate themselves, because they're quite often not coming in with a cooperative background. Right. And then maybe not coming in with an insurance background. So now here they are, you know, you know, with the board sort of overseeing this. And yeah, we've got an advisory board that does report to them. But there's still they've gotten a very important role. So good governance and education, I would say are the two key things. I mean, we're very fortunate we are we are profitable. We were returning funds back every year to our members. I think. So, I mean, more money is always nice to do things. But I think that will come through growth, and greater economies of scale. And we're in a good spot now. And right now, we just need to focus on being a really good cooperative through governance and education. I think that's, I'll leave those are the two big ones.

PS  1:03:35
Would you say that this is the same? Or is there a different set of needs for the for your membership in general?

TH  1:03:46
For the membership in general education, education is the constant battle. Just making sure that as a consumer cooperative, we're not, we're not just seen as a product. And you know, you can always buy something cheaper with most things in life. And if it boils down to just price, then that's not that's not where we want to compete. And that's not who we want to be. So, we have to be very careful of we have to be very careful of not becoming those we compete against. It's very easy to get sucked into sort of a level of isomorphism that just can destroy you. So, education is key with our membership.

PS  1:04:35
Okay, now, if this cooperative has the effect, you hope for in the long run, what would it look like?

TH  1:04:42
Can you just I missed the first part of that sorry.

PS  1:04:44
Okay, if this cooperative has the effect, you hope for in the long run, what would it look like?

TH  1:04:53
Well, the vision of the board for the court but I'll give you two things on that. I will give you my personal opinion. On this one, too.
It’s not my, it's from the board's perspective, I think they see. And we, maybe it's just an extension of this, but I think they see the cooperative structure as a pinwheel. And I think the brokerage that we own through the cooperative that does the group benefits is one, one spoke that comes off the wheel. I think the board sees that there's an opportunity through the structure that we've established, for nations to come together in all kinds of other ways to meet other needs. And, and maybe that's HR, maybe that's other types of insurance, maybe it's other types of organizations. And, and it's a bit of a, it's a turnkey, it's ready to go, you just need people to want to come together. And we've done the heavy lifting to kind of create, create a house for people to live in, and but they have to want to live in it. So. So we've got one bedroom all set up and working well. But there's a few other empty bedrooms, that could be other things. And I think that's, that's certainly the that's the bigger picture, what I would see, with what we're doing with the room that we've already decorated, and we're living in, I think we've got a real opportunity to do a whole lot more with it as more people come together. And I think we've got a real opportunity to have more influence on the industry, I think, I think that's the biggest thing. And we spend a lot. And I in particular spend a lot of time bridging the needs of, of our indigenous members with insurance companies that don't have that, or I don't want this to sound like it's something intentional, but maybe it is, maybe it isn't, that are kind of ignorant of those types of things. So, you're dealing with a system that's very inside the box and has a way of doing things and you're dealing with clients that have needs that are outside that box, and it takes a lot of effort to partner develop the relationships and to have, you have to have so many more conversations to get those needs met, because they don't understand what their needs are. So, if we can inject more of that lens inside the box, it will make everybody's lives much, much better down the road. So, I see that happening over time. But that's a longer haul.. It's a bigger, bigger thing.

PS  1:07:37
So, I have this as a question that we added to this, but like, you know, kind of at the start of, you know, what advice would you give to your formals your former self at the start of your cooperative journey?

TH  1:07:57
What advice? Oh, that's a good question. Be patient, be patient, because you got to, you got to see things through and stick them out. And when you're working through the cooperative business structure, particularly with a large membership base, there's a lot of time on consensus building and, you know, in a different way than maybe you'd see in private industry where you can kind of kind of, oh, we're going to do this. Okay, let's do it tomorrow. It doesn't work that way. Right. So, and that's a good and that's not a bad thing. It's a very different way of doing something. So, I think patients and learn as much as you can, maybe I'll add, maybe I'll add to that. So, for example, example. And, again, I know you've got other questions, but so I've been here four years now. I worked for Dasia. And, and prior to joining many nations that we were, in our industry were always bought and sold. We were I worked for them for a few years. So, I had a little bit of exposure to the corporate business structure, but really far removed from anything really cooperative, much different than what I'm doing now. I spent the first two years kind of acclimatized and going, okay, you know, how does this work? And what are the nuances and how do you get things done? And how do you, you know, that kind of stuff. And I realized about two years into it, that there was so much I didn't know, in the cooperative world that and we needed that resource. We needed that knowledge in house as well. Right? Like there's a lot of knowledge that in education that is out there and available. So, So I worked with, with the board and put a proposal together and I'm taking my masters in Masters of Management through St. Mary's University and cooperatives and credit unions. So, I'm in my first year that because we realized as a cooperative if we want to be a really good cooperative, we need to arm ourselves we need to educate ourselves with the skills to do that and internalize that so yeah patients and  learn English

PS  1:10:12
 congratulations because I've heard just nothing but good things about that program. That's a Nova Scotia right. 

TH  1:10:20
Yeah it's based on a Halifax, 

PS  1:10:22
Oh my gosh, Yeah, yeah. Well, congratulations. Okay, I'm going to ask you a few general business questions, and then we'll be able to wrap this up. because there were some of the questions. Well, I'll just kind of keep going through. What is the coops current annual revenue? Is it under 25? Is it 25 To 50 50 to 100,000 100,000 to 200,000? Or over 200,000?

TH  1:10:57
Over 200,000 in annual revenue were

PS  1:11:00
An annual revenue of over $200,000. Okay. And then you already did tell us this, that your cooperative distributes redistributes profits or funds to the members? How often do you do that? Is that annually or?

TH  1:11:20
Yep, it's, it's annually when there are profits to distribute. We have been profitable every year since we formed this to co-op. So, we haven't had that issue. But if we did have a year where we weren't profitable, we wouldn't have we wouldn't have declared surplus, we may still have a patronage dividend. We do. We do have some cash, but then we try to pay out patient dividend every year and we have retained, we have retained some cash on hand and reserve just to make sure that we keep it fairly consistent. So yeah, annually, it's paid out and we try to ensure that there's a payout every year.

PS  1:11:59
Okay. Yeah. And then What strategies did, or have you done to raise capital? For Many Nations? Is it A donations, B grant funds, C loan from a tribe, D loan from financial institution, E member funds, and I think you can answer as many as you want.

TH  1:12:27
Sure, none of the above. We are debt free. Now, that being said, we have been, we have been looking at a few business initiatives that would require capital. And that would come we would, we've looked at three different options for that. One is we have retained some cash to invest back into the business. Through our declared surpluses, not everything in a declared surplus gets paid out as patients’ dividend, right, like, you know, we had we've like, for example, we've got the education fund now. So, part of our surpluses going there, part of it gets paid on patronage dividends. And part of it goes back to reinvesting within the organization. So, we can self-fund certain to a certain level. We are exploring how best to because we haven't done it before. But remember capital investments, and what that might look like and how to facilitate that. And, you know, what are modest, but appropriate rates of return and those kinds of things that are consistent with our cooperative model, but we haven't, we've never done that. So that but we would be open to that. And I guess if institutional lending is a is a necessary evil, if there's a business case for it, and we would explore that or on that side. So, but I think first of all, we try and self-fund. Second of all, we try to, we look within our membership so that if we're paying interest back, it stays within the communities. There, there are some indigenous lending institutions in the country, we would probably seek them out as a third. And then if we had to go outside of that, then then we would it depends, but it would depend on the situation. But as it stands right now, we haven't had to do anything.

PS  1:14:23
Okay. Then I have a question. Do you have a budget? 

TH
We do

PS 
Okay, and how often do you look at it or review it? Is it done weekly, monthly, quarterly annually? Other what?

TH  1:14:37
We set the budget annually, management team reviews it monthly, and we report to the board on a quarterly


PS  1:14:52
when you do you know, and again, you may not have this answer, but do you know if you worked with anyone in the startup, I'd like a co-op developer when this was starting up in 2009.

Sandy McMahon  1:15:05
Pamela, I think those ones which are a little bit repetitive questions, I think probably best to skip those. 

PS 
Okay alright. 

I've scanned them. I think we know enough to be able to deal with those. Okay. All right.

PS  1:15:21
Okay, and then my so, did you? Well, then I can't go into this, like 27 and 28. Well, I guess I can Did you work with anyone else? In? Did you work with anyone else outside of your membership? Or was it just the group member? I mean, your group members? Like, did you see this? This is screwing me up. Sandy. By the way, you guys have changed this. 


TH  1:15:53
So, you got asking. So, when the coop started? How do we how do we do it? Did we seek sort of like a cooperative spirit to assist us with it or something along those lines?
I don't think there was anything formal, I think Joe did speak with other individuals, First Nations and some other businesspeople, but it really was a call it self-initiative between a few people either there wasn't anything formal on it. And they kind of figured out.

PS  1:16:25
Do you know, do you know if you did a feasibility study or a business plan?

TH  1:16:31
I don't know. Well, we remember, we were already operating as a non for profit for 20 years before that. So, we were a bit of a known commodity, right? Okay. Because it's really just changing the legal entity and the governance structure.

 Okay.
 Not the business activities themselves, like the core business activities.

PS  1:16:55
And I think you answered this, that your members have to be members of the nation, except you're allowing now you've got friends of purchase products

TH  1:17:04
Our products, our members, the requirement to be a member of the cooperative is it has to be an indigenous organization. So that would be 51%, indigenous owned or greater. A first nation by virtue of the fact that it's the first nation is by default and allowed to be a member, if it's a private company, say, you know, in downtown Winnipeg that's owned by a group of people, if it's 51%, owned by indigenous persons, it would qualify to be a member. Anything under that we could do business with them as a client, and we would do business with them as a client, but they have they have no membership, right? They are purely a client.

PS  1:17:50
Okay, and I think we've some of these questions. We've already answered Sandy, like, 30 there's some of the questions here have already been, they've already been answered.

Sandy McMahon  1:18:04
Yeah, I think 30 We've answered, I think 31 We've answered and 32? Because I think we've answered they

PS  1:18:14
also have all been answered.

Sandy McMahon  1:18:19
Maybe, maybe 35.Yeah. And 37.


PS  1:18:26
Okay, how did you develop? Do you know how they develop their marketing plan? Or how do you market? And did you or do you utilize website social media marketing?

TH  1:18:39
Yeah, we have all of the above. We, we started a social media campaign this year, kind of in a bit. We didn't use a pre COVID that much, we were very much a face-to-face relationship building way of marketing. So, attending conferences, going out, doing personal visits, it was very much a face-to-face activity. Up until a couple of years ago, obviously, all that's changed. So, we've, we do a lot more zoom. Things are just now starting to get back to a little bit more face to face. So that's coming back a little bit, but I don't think it'll go back as far as it did before. So, we started to ramp up the social media. We do have a website as well that we had done. We had redone two years ago. We rebranded our organization three years ago with sort of a new, a new look and feel that was more inclusive of all nations. We've advertised in magazines we’ve; we support. We support a few Canadian based national organizations, one of them is Aboriginal Financial Officers Association, which focuses on education for indigenous people with indigenous roles at indigenous companies. So that's kind of a logical fit. Canadian Council for Aboriginal business, we also do a fair amount of work with on that. So, we work with a few associations is on that as well.

PS  1:20:26
Now, how did you address management issues? Do you have nonmember management and staff?

TH  1:20:33
Yes, we're purely a consumer cooperative. So. So myself and all the other staff members, we are not members in the cooperative.

PS  1:20:47
And then my, this is kind of do you have an employee handbook? Is that?

TH
Yes, we do.

PS
Yeah. Is that because I think again, this is, you know, does your employee This is a little bit different, because of the way you guys are structured. I don't think this question is going to
 
TH 1:21:09
Fire away.

PS  1:21:10
It's not going to it's not going to answer that it's not going to work the same way. Does your employee handbook offer  nontraditional leave? If yes, please describe what would that well,  nontraditional leave would be like, leave to like, there's a lot of communities, you know, like you think of the Inuit. It's all sustenance. It's seasonal, the way that you know, the hunting and the gathering. So, they have they they're usually given what we call an untraditional leave here or ceremony season.

TH  1:21:45
Yeah, I understand what you're saying. I don't believe that's written into our handbook. That's a very good question, though. I, at the same time, you know, we're again, we're pretty small company, if someone was going to ceremony for three days, I don't think any of us on the management team would have any issue with that. Okay. Yeah, it is.  We'd allow it. I think it's probably more informal. I don't we do have an employee handbook. But I don't think it speaks to that. But that's a good question. I will take that back.

PS  1:22:19
Because some of the cuts are good thing for us to have in there, I think. Well, yeah. Because some of the consumer cooperatives, they do have that for their employees. You know, so it just depends. And yours is a little bit different because of the way that you know, you're not a member of the co-op, you're employed by the co-op, you answer to the Board of Directors, it's a little bit different. We're in some, they allow the members to be employees as well. And you know, so there's a little different crossover, the distinction is different with yours and some of the other ones that we've interviewed.

TH  1:22:56
Yeah, if you're doing some multistakeholder cooperatives, they would work a little different for sure.

PS  1:23:01
Yep. Now I just have another question. Are there different rules you have to follow for operations on for operations on territory and off territory? 

TH  1:23:15
Um nothing formal, but I think. I don't know. I've been doing it so long. Now. I think I just do it by second nature. I probably do. I probably do. I mean, I think we won't call it unless we're invited. And I mean, it depends on who we're meeting with. Like, like you said, if we're meeting with an elder to discuss something, I will take tobacco and there's nothing. There's  no employee handbook that says you will do this. That's it. But we will follow cultural protocols going depending on what the right cultural protocol is for that situation, right. 


PS  1:24:01
Okay. And then here's this is the final question. Are there any other important questions or ideas about your cooperative that you think we should be aware of, that we didn't cover? In our questions?

TH  1:24:18
I can't think of anything off the top my head. I think we did a pretty good job touching on most things there.

PS  1:24:24
Okay. We know, Do I have your physical address?

TH  1:24:30
If you don't, I can send it to you. 

PS  1:24:33
Would you send me your physical? Would you send me your physical address because I just wanted to send you a thank you gift for your time. Oh, that's it's just something that it's something that I do. It's a part of who, who I am as a human being, that when people share their expertise in their time, we, we I just want to honor that, and I just so appreciate just your openness and the things that you touched on were really beautifully articulated. And I just want to thank you for that. So just send me an email today with your address and I'll send you some goodies from here.

TH  1:25:13
Oh, very generous. Thank you.

Sandy McMahon  1:25:18
I'm going to go ahead and stop the recording. 
