Page 1

00:00:02
Hello, good morning.
00:00:04
Morning.
00:00:06
How are you?
00:00:07
I'm doing good, I'm a… sorry, Joy, I'm out in the fields.
00:00:10
Oh, yes, definitely important, yeah.
It was… it was interesting. I was talking with… with a friend of mine over the weekend, and oops. From here. Well, good morning. My name is Jodi Brache. I, let's see… I work with Organization_6, that's my main position, but I was able to work and help with these, with these different programs, such as Organization_12. And, I've worked with tribal colleges over the years, and I've really seen a lot of, like, potential, and I want to see these students thrive. You know, I really want to see them, you know, look… the fact that they have access to, this qualitative and quantitative data, I want to definitely help with that. And so, I didn't have any access to that until… until grad school. And so, the fact that they're doing this now is just one of the reasons why I'm helping them now. with this particular grant. So, I got a chance to meet so many lovely people, such as Person_3, and which… which you know, and then getting a chance to work with the program and hear about, about the ins and outs of these different co-ops, and…Like, what they actually do, just like now, like, you're working in the fields and doing a lot of really important things now. And so…That's what, you know, our program is, and do you have any questions about this particular project?
00:01:37
No, not right now. I mean, as they come along, I'll last for sure.
00:01:42
Okay, that sounds good. And, sorry about my voice, it's sort of like I have this, like, tickle in it, and it's sort of, it's… it does… it definitely doesn't feel like COVID from before, but it feels like I sound like a… like a snuffleepagus or something. I'm just sort of like, what's going on? But…But anyway, so excuse my voice. So, our first question, is where is your cooperative located?
00:02:10
We are located on the south side of Location_1, Location_9. You're going, south on I-19, which is the international highway that connects to Location_12 and the U.S.-Location_12 border, which is Location_7, I want to say. We're right along that freeway. We hooked the freeway going out to see our fields as you're traveling outside Location_1.
00:02:30
Wonderful. Okay. And so, as part of that, what is your purpose or mission for your cooperative?
00:02:39
Written into the mission, of course, there's a number of different things, but primarily it encompasses that preservation of culture. Continuation of it, and then, education, of course, is a major component of that, so… Those are two main factors. On top of that is that, economic support and development for the community. Being able to provide, jobs, financial opportunities, on top of that, as the business itself is an investment to the landowners, of course, and, returning that money back to the community, of course.
00:03:14
Absolutely. Thank you for sharing that. When was your cooperative established?
00:03:20
The business itself was established in the 1970s. The farm here itself has been operating within the lineages of the different generations. For 4,000 years of history, so, it's got a long, long history, but the business itself, the operation here since the 1970s, we've been operating.
00:03:40
Okay. Wonderful. So, what is your role in the position, or the cooperative, or with the cooperative, I should say? Are you a member, a staff, board, management member?
00:03:53
I am management. I'm not a current community member, but I am a tribal member. I'm from the Babakiri District, which is about 60 miles from the community here. Person_4 is what they call a satellite district. It's separated from the main reservation, but it's one of the districts for Organization_20. It's surrounded by the city of Location_1, Organization_7, of course, and then the south, of course, which being that Location_5, city of Location_5, just a couple minutes south. But, it's unique here. There's a lot of different opportunities, but I myself, as management, have been able to, have been given an opportunity, and I'm the first, say… second Autumn Farm Manager since the very first Autumn Farm Manager, which was Person_5 in the establishment of the farm in the 1970s. So it's an honor to be given that leadership, but I am in part of management. I oversee… Everything when it comes to the farm, all the departments, when it comes to production. Administration, sales, repair and maintenance, I do it all. But that's my job here. One of my primary things coming on as management, though, is, like, I try not to do too much. Staff and education are what we try to do, being able to take that as part of the mission statement and apply it to my job, training and teaching my staff and giving everything that they need to be better employees and top-notch staff to be able to provide revenue and production for the farm, and success towards that mission statement, of course. So, it's a huge role, but my role here is management, and, of course, trainer, I like to say.
00:05:27
Absolutely. That's so important, and yes, definitely helping everybody with all the different things that they need to do, and I understand, like, the… the, you know, like, the reality of wearing different hats, you know, depending on, like, what the situation is, and… and just stepping up and do it, so that is great. And so, what was the original vision that brought the community together for the start of the cooperative?
00:05:53
I wonder…Preservation of land. There was a group that still is recognized today through what is known as Organization_18. Person_4 is one of the…districts, as a result of Organization_23, would fracture the land into a number of different allotments given to individuals, and then those individuals have fractured the land based on how many, family members they have at the time, of course, within the family tree. So, it's really, the land that was the biggest thing here. Like I said, farming was happening way before the Dawes Act, and landowners at the time got together and created Organization_24, which was taking that land, combining it, and putting it into a business opportunity. And then preserving it for the reason that we're still doing here today, which is, farming, so…That's one of the main missions, and one of the main reasons why we are continuing to do what we do today, but also by why they created it was that I'm trying to remember the term, land defender, that's what it was, land defenders is what they were calling themselves at the time. And, but again, with that, after the farm became a water defender and fenders and things like that, so it's a number of different things, but it all became around protecting their home, the land, the resources here, and what they use to live off of all their generations.
00:07:14
Absolutely. Wow, thank you for sharing that. And yes, definitely, you know, when people, know those differences, especially, like, you're referring to, like, the land defenders, like, there's so many different things that are just… so many different corporations and businesses that want to, like, take this… take this land, like, but that's not…what, what needs to happen, you know, and so I'm glad that you're doing that. So, how did you identify community members, formal and informal partners, to be part of the vision?
00:07:47
At the time of the creation, of course, it was the landowners, and right now, that's what it is. Those are the members of the cooperative. Myself and my staff, as employees are the operation part of the business. We run the farm, we do day-to-day business, and continue bringing in revenue for the association. The landowners, the board members, which are the elected officials from within Organization_9, those, of course, it's elected through lineage. If someone has a son and a daughter, and they have children, those individuals get part of the land, of course, and then what that allotment has to offer And a lot of times what it came down to was the resources on that allotment. Whether it be the wood, the farming, the water. the livestock. It was… it was used in a certain way that was more or less, dedicated, A dedication to the way of life we used to have, and so…today, those is still, happening through lineages, like, the… people are having children here and there, of course, and those are part of the Alacia Associate… Organization_2, as the, higher-ups, like the elders of those, go on and pass on. Those landowners get passed on to the family members, of course, as they go. So, it's through that lineage, and through the family members, and the bloodlines of the original landowners of the Santa Organization_10.
00:09:08
Hmm, okay. Thank you for explaining that. So, how did you keep the community engaged and let them know about the initial startup?
00:09:21
Since the beginning, I think that was one of the main, like I said, components was, incorporating and preserving culture. It's all encompassed in the community. Our culture is based on community, and everything we do is around the community. Agriculture itself isn't just nowadays, where it's one family doing all the farming. In native… in native culture, it was the community doing the farming. So, with that understanding, we continue to move forward, and since the beginning, they've done that. In past years, we've had a…Slight drift from being more a part of the community, but, since my role as management, that was one of my main components, was bringing that back to the…bringing the farm back to the community's image and making sure that they knew that this is their farm. This is… we're here for them, and that we want… we want them to be involved as much as possible. So, planting days and…Community days, we're getting ready, actually, for what they call our Lati Day, where we bring in the landowners, have a day with them, do reports about what's going on the farm, some of the success, the challenges, and then what we look forward as far as going forward into the future. And this year, actually, we're bringing them on-site, and doing what they call a day on the farm, where we're doing hand-to-hand, day-to-day life of what goes on on the farm. So, they'll go see the sales department as they're loading hay bales. Operations staff is getting ready to plant wheat in the fields as we're pushing into November, December, of course, so it's an active time of the year, and we're happy to have that, but keeping them much involved as much as possible, whether they be landowners, or they're just living here in the community and having an opportunity where, whether it be education, purchasing some of our fine crops, like the, squash that just recently came in, all the yellow meat and watermelon, like, which is always being demanded by the community.
That we're here for them, and that's… it's an opportunity for them to come and be able to learn these skills for themselves, as well as other educational opportunities that the farm has to offer.
00:11:17
Absolutely. Wow, thank you. Thank you for… for explaining all of that. That's important. So, let's see…Did you… when you were initially starting the cooperative, or even now, did you visit and speak with other cooperatives, and look at their resources and say, we want this for our community, for the people? Did you… did you do that, or did you do something different?
00:11:46
Based on our understanding, and of course, education, so things, how, it was established, the business itself, as well as the association. There was some consultation involved, of course, whether it be the legal side, to make sure that the bylaws and everything were, to the legal standings, and then, of course, as well as the cooperative, creation of cooperative structure, of course, so… but in the beginning, I think they also wanted to make sure that they were… encompassing the idea of land preservation, and I do believe that's why the, the cooperative membership is based on the family members and the lineages of that, of course. So, that being for… that being… with that understanding, they moved forward and based everything around that, idea of land preservation, creating the cooperative we see here today, of course, so we're slightly different, but…With a purpose, of course, definitely with a purpose, and you don't see a lot of change here, aside from rotation in fields and the irrigation system, you know, I talk to some elders and say that they can walk into the fields and say, you know, they used to be here, they used to walk into the fields when they were young, and it was almost the same, there's just a couple trees missing, maybe. So it's all about that land preservation and purpose, most wine, of course.
00:13:01
Absolutely. Wow, thank you. So, did your cooperative work with anyone else? Like, a cooperative developer or a consultant, as the cooperative was… was either starting or what it is now?
00:13:19
Of course, I did mention they did have consultation. I do believe it was out of Location_3, of course, to help structure some of the administrative and, I'm gonna say. Political side of what was gonna be the association, so the electorate board sides, the bylaws, the charters, all these things needed to be put in place, but they also needed to know how to do it moving forward, so the consultation definitely came in and helped them out. We still use a lot of that, we haven't changed or based away a lot from it so much. And it keeps it rooted from where we come from, but…We, in the past, as far as our administration, have noticed that we need to adjust here and there, so we've been… we've made notes of some of the things that we've… have, brought recommendations to the board about, you know, adjustments need to be made. I think some of these, adaptations, I guess you could say, for the lack of a better description, need to be done so that we can continue to move forward as a business. The world's changed a lot since the 1970s, of course, but we definitely have a rooted, That, structure, which was con- which was based on the consultation out of Location_3. I can't remember the firm that was out of Location_3 that gave us that, but, we've done our research based on here, just kind of understanding, but also that, in college, Person_5 was my mentor. He's… he's actually a farm manager for, Organization_21, and I was an intern under him for several years, and he educated me deeply about a lot of things, and we visited the co-op a lot, and so I was kind of understanding on some of the things that he… Excuse me some of the things that he was talking about I had brought up at the time. That were related to some of the things that we had read. Coming into management, so… it, it, it's things that we need to…adapt to that we brought forward, like, for example, some of the changes in the structure that the, the board presidents… I'm sorry, the board of… the board members, our elected board members use, whether it be changes in some of the structure of how we do business, but adaptation is definitely needed, and we definitely are probably going to look into some consultation we have now we've adapted our consultation, like, our legal representation, for example. I'd love to say this, but he's an Apache gentleman out of White River, I believe. But he's really good. It's just great to see a native, counselor just doing good things, but he's also seeing how the…farm and cooperative was created based on understanding of Native communities, and how we grew up, and how we grew up, and how the creation of it was done, so… It's good to see that, and he's helping us making sure we do this right, and we go forward with a better structure, a better foundation for the farm and the business.

Page 2

00:16:00
Absolutely. So, do your bylaws provide measures for distributing profits?
00:16:10
Yes, of course, like I said, the profits for the farm are an investment of the landowners. We do a payout to the landowners every year, twice a year. And that's changed, I do believe, when we came on as management 4 or 5 years ago, they just renegotiated a 25-year lease. So that's always changing every time that they have to go ahead and renegotiate. I believe it's fluctuated throughout the years, but yes, there is a payout to the investment of the success of the farm. And it usually helps with a lot of what's going on, in the community. Like I said, it's going back into the community, and we're happy to see that, so… an investment to the farm and… I'm sorry, to the community is what we'd like to see.
00:16:52
Absolutely. So, did your cooperative establish conflict resolution protocols in your bylaws? Or is that something that you developed along the way, or…How does that work.
00:17:04
They are included. I can't comment on where they were developed along the way. Ideally, it's something that comes along with any kind of structure, because there's always going to be conflict when it comes to ideas. But resolution and, how we go forward with those ideas and that conflict resolution is always that solution solution, but, we've adapted, we still adapt today. We've seen a lot and number of different things, arise in my time as management, and I've been in the role for going on 6 years…6 years now. So it's always out of adaptation, whether it be with… internally with staff members, or it be with businesses or vendors. When we came in, there was a huge debt under the farm that we had to come in and figure out that How do we handle it properly, legally, and beneficially for both parties? Again, adaptation…And then adapting those things to our bylaws and moving forward, of course. So yes, we still do that today, and I'm… I don't, I don't believe that, I don't remember when they had put it in, but of course, I'm pretty sure they were included at the beginning of the creation of those bylaws.
00:18:10
Absolutely. Those conflicts happen with, like, like, anybody. So, any organization or business, and so, yes, definitely trying to figure out, you know, how we could learn from, you know, what you guys are doing. And so, as part of that, did you create a map, a community map of potential members? Formal or informal partners as part of that?
00:18:36
Yes, well, with any kind of Native community, there's always some sort of structure when it comes to elders, traditional singers, medicine men, you know, the community members themselves, the children. It's all kind of a structure based on education, experience, and age, of course. And with us, we definitely look to the elders when it comes to questions, comes to concerns, and I want to say encouragement. Not only that, but blessings. When we have, the need for what we call makais on medicine, is to come in and do…blessings of the facility, it's always reaching out to them, knowing that they have that experience and that level of knowledge to be able to do that for us, while also, connecting and making sure that we're always there to gain knowledge from those that were there before us. One of the projects that the farm had did, I loved to see Was we did a wheat pasting project where we laid… we pasted our tanks with pictures of members of the past from, whether it be community members that were, part of the board, or former employees that were big, significant roles to the success of the farm. And the community members loved it. They came in, they took pictures, you know, it was great. It was an all-natural based product, so it didn't last long. They started to peel over time because they were, there were some sort of… there wasn't some sort of chemicals involved, I want to say. But, it was great to see that, and making sure that we acknowledge those in the past and how we got here is what we want to do, but, again, acknowledging that… that structure in that community and how we were a part of it. And, it's also a thing to say that most of my staff are within the age of 29 to 35, or maybe even 40. We're within the 30-year age, which is good to see, but we're all young, and so I find myself at times, you know, looking to the elders, asking questions, and even to this day, with Person_5. Being able to reach out to his team, his department, and him, himself, to be able to get concerns, questions answered. I still have things… I still have questions to this day. It's always… it's always learning something, whether it becomes…Simple or complex, no matter how old you are, it's always going to be learning something, and being open to that is how you be successful, of course, but…We… we definitely want… we recognize that structure, and that's the structure we follow here, outside of what we have when it comes to our administrative structure, when it's management and all these other levels, whether it be the board, but for us, it's always elders, you know, because we'd be sitting in a board meeting, and there's a couple elder elderly individuals that are on the board, and whenever they have questions, they'll be like, what do you think? And they'll look to them, it's just that structure of the Native understanding how we were uproot of Portal, so we definitely follow that structure.
00:21:16
Absolutely, it's true. I'm so thankful that my, my mom and my aunties are around, so I can ask them those things, you know, just asking, you know, different questions, and even when I go back home to cells and all, I see different people, like Mrs. Sequiros, Person_6, we were there for his Celebration of life, and it's just exciting to see, you know, where, you know, people are, but even though we're, like, much, much older, you know, just being able to, like, I'll still call her Mrs. Sekiros, even though I haven't met her student in, like, I don't know how many years, 20 years or so, 20, 30 years? But still. But no, I understand exactly what you're saying, and that's really important to think about, you know, these elders having all this knowledge, and that's extremely important. And so, today, like, how do you keep, like, the current leadership involved? Or, like, how do you keep them, Engaged in all the information… all the important work you're doing.
00:22:18
Farm day. We just get them to the farm. In the beginning, when I came on as management, with past managers before me, and I've seen 3 of them in my time as employment here from the… at the farm, I started here as an equipment operator, so just kind of coming up the ranks gives me, another encouraging, excuse me, encouraging purpose to move forward and to be able to gain experience through some of the employees and how we had the hardship, but I've seen 3 managers here, and it's… it's always…they've always had that disconnect with the community, and not only that, but they were not autumn. They didn't know the community, they didn't know the process, when it comes to either the political stuff, or even that community structure, like I just explained, when it comes to elders, adults, and kids. Being able to, bring them to the farm, get their hands dirty, and show them that, of course, and I would love to say, this is their farm.
00:23:14
This is what they should be doing.
00:23:16
you know, I love that I have the opportunity to come and run the farm here and teach, but I always come back to that. I love to teach people, because I would love to pass the torch to this community member that's from Organization_4, that knows what they're… that learns the fields, that learns the ag work, the science, the education, the mechanics. The business part of it. And then take the torch and move forward, because this is their farm, you know, and that's one of the biggest things I love doing, is getting them out here, getting them into the fields, getting them to the yard, and then not just be a PowerPoint, but something more in-depth to get them get them a little dirty, I want to say, and bless them with the soil that we have here on the ground as our biggest tool and our biggest lifeline. So that's the biggest thing I can say, is just getting them out here, you know, and as much as it is… it seems like it's hard work, it's therapy, and we all need it. we've had a volunteer program, that was very successful. We had a couple of non-tribal members come through. They were very thankful for the opportunity to come through. One of the things that got me was, there was a lady who had, who had said her mother had just passed away, and she was going through grief. It just happened 2 days ago. They had Perry put her in the ground, and then she wasn't too sure what she was gonna do, and the opportunity for volunteering came up, and so she came to the farm. And within a couple weeks, and within the program's, lifespan. She was doing so well, and she had brought it up at the… at the recognition meeting, and it was… it was heartful. I was like, wow, you know that's what we're… that's what I'm shooting for. I want to bring the people back, I want to really reconnect them with the soil, with their land, and show them that this is what we used to do, this is what we should be doing, you know? In the event that everything fails, we have the ability to be self-sustainable through this type of lifestyle. So, that's really my goal as a manager, as an autumn, as a farmer. fellow farmer to farmers, let's go do this, get out here and let's get dirty. And it seems to work most of the time. We had some elders come out and do some planting with some of the staff we've had some of the, the youth days where the kids come out from some of the families and get involved with some of the stuff we do here on the farm. It's really great to see them come out and get involved. It's one of my main goals as a manager coming on as an employee, and especially as an office manager.
00:25:42
Absolutely. You're right, that is so healing for people to be able to, like, go out and do work, and to, like you mentioned, like, get your hands dirty. And to do those… those different things that, like, they are not separate from the land, and… and that's… that's really important to know and to think about, and all of those healing capabilities that are component… that are… that are major components of it. So, do you see differences between your cooperative and others that you know of? Like, there's many around, like, Turtle Island, but, so many others that we… that we don't know of, you know, people that are doing cooperative work.
00:26:19
Yes, actually. And my understanding, of course, most of the time with the cooperative, it's the members that are…Running the operation, they're part of the cooperative. You either purchase in, or you, get invited in some way. It's a different structure here, but again, like I said, as you learn about it, it has a purpose is preservation. They're trying to make sure that we don't lose what we definitely have here, which is the land. So it has a different structure here, and in my… experience and education, understanding, the cooperative here is slightly different. But of course, like I said, they did it with the purpose, and I love the, the push, the drive, the goal, the mission, and it's definitely kept us going here, but if I had to point one out, it would be the cooperative here. They have a slight different structure, a different type of purpose, I want to say, but again, it's… it's for that main reason, the land. And with natives, it's all about not being able to lose our home, and with autumns, we're so…gifted and blessed to be able to have not been relocated, so… it's good to see that, but… and the main… and the main thing, it would be that land, of course.
00:27:33
Absolutely. Wow, that's definitely important. So, does your cooperative hire non-member, like, non-member management and staff? Do they want to be…
00:27:47
Yes, like I said, the…Back in the 1970s to about [Year], Person_5 was a farm manager. He had, in [Year], he had left the farm, left San Javier, joined education. After a career of farming. So since then, there have been Organization_1 farm managers, whether it be Hispanic. Anglo-Saxon, or whatever you want to say, they're… they've been on not them. They're not from the community, they're not from… most of the time, from Location_9. Which gave it a slightly more different twist when it came to things. And most of those managers came in, and in my definition, were a bit greedy, in seeing the resources and availability that the farm had. Whether it be the water rights, the land here that was available, taking those… taking those resources and running with it a little more, into different directions that weren't part of that mission statement. So…again, being able to bring that mission statement back, refocus the farm, it's helped to have that, opportunity for our people to be a part of the leadership. And again, I think that with past, I don't know if it's an,
discouragement for members to apply, because they don't have that educational background, that experience. You know, with… without due… without fairness, when I… they… they offered me the position, I was a, an operator for the running equipment is just running a baler for the fields. I had an agricultural background with the applied sciences for welding, agomechanics, and then…
I have a certificate, and then I have an associate's degree in agriculture and natural resources, so I got the education, I guess you could say. It was the management part about it that I hesitated. It was a day that passed. I had to think about it when they offered me. Because that was my hesitation, is I have no management experience. I've been a supervisor, I've ran a crew of 13 kids.
and Organization_13, the biggest staff I've ever had, so it was a little unusual to be given an opportunity, but…again, often leadership, and I think that's what was needed here. So taking my understanding of all of the autumn structures, whether it be the political systems, the district financial systems, understanding that things took time on the nation, things have process and had structure. I took the opportunity as manager, and was able to refocus the farm back to that mission statement. And it's been great, but I also try to take that approach of, you know, I'm not the do-it-all manager, I have staff, these people were hired for a reason, just like I was hired when I was an employee. So it's been a great opportunity to be able to, bring that focus back, but I think that in the past, the farm has just been missing that key component of autumn leadership. And I try to honor that every day with being able to do as much as we can, teach as much as I can, but there's a lot going on in the farm, especially at this time of the year, we're always busy. But staff with 23 people now, and I always get praise from… I never feel like I'm doing my job right, honestly, but I always get praise from people saying, you're doing a good job, and…it seems to be working, because we're still moving seven years later as a manager, and we're definitely making revenue, we're definitely reconnecting the farm. It's been a mission to get it done, but I think that was the key component mission, was that optimum leadership, and it's been an honor to be able to give them that opportunity.
00:31:30
Absolutely. Wow. That's, yeah, that's awesome. It's inspiring, for sure.So… And just switching gears a bit. For your, for your, did you develop a cooperative, or did you develop a marketing plan? Excuse me.
00:31:47
there was not much… I mean, there was fractures of one when we had came on. Based on some of the things they were doing in the past, it was…it was slightly working, so we definitely recreated it. We've actually brought in new marketing people. We've had several marketing coordinators and supervisors since being here, but right now, we have an amazing young lady who's doing a great job. We hired her out of AmeriCorp, again, looking at overhead and finances, how do we save money? We did… looked at resources, so AmeriCorp, we had a placement worker come in, we would put her in marketing, and she did an amazing job. One of the things that I love to do, and it…I don't want it to sound horrible, is that I like to hire non-authoms for marketing, because they like to see everything we do and display it, and they see it with the eye that we don't, you know, every day see, and it brings out the beauty and the uniqueness, and I believe…I forget, she's young, I forget her age, but she's young, she's been very great, she's created the volunteer program, she's recreated some of the, the issues with our internet site, the square marketing issues we've had with our purchasing, our POS, I want to say. So it… she's great, and actually, it's great to say that we've actually brought her on as a contract worker this coming fiscal year. Next year, we'll put her on… bring her on as a full-time worker employee, so it's been an adjustment, but just being able to weed out some of the, the good employees is what we're looking for. And when I came on as a manager, there were… 32, 34 employees total, and that was way too many people to be running the farm, so just being able to choose the best people to move forward, because it definitely… it takes a lot to run a forum, but it also…costs a lot to pay those people to do it. Overhead's a big thing. So, again, just refocusing that, opportunity to the staff and teaching them what they need to do. It's been…a big adjustment, but yeah.
00:33:46
Absolutely. No, thank you for mentioning that. I mean, it's… it's wild, you know, when, because people are doing these things every day, and you're, like, you wake up and you see your home, but for somebody else to come in and say, oh, that's… that's beautiful, like, this needs to happen here, I can completely see that, you know, like, having, like, an outside person, you know, come in and see your… see the things. So, for that, does that… does this new person, help with, like, newsletters and emails and things like that? Or do they… how does that work?
00:34:16
There, there was a newsletter in the past. We actually had a newsletter created by our previous marketing coordinator, who was, including a number of different things that were reporting on the form. Also, what they, as she called, Person_7. It was a employee highlight of different… every week or every month of an individual, what they did, and where they were from, because not only that, we love to point out that. I want to say 85% of my staff are from the community. They are part of the lineages of those landowners that live here and own the land. So again, they're just, they're continuing that, that, Practice of their… of their history, of their ancestors. But, of course, gaining more education as we definitely go forward through the training I provide, as well as the training we provide through, outside vendors. We've done first aid training and different things like that. It's opportunities for the community, because, they also include, like, active shooter trainings and things. I love to see, because we can definitely respond to things in the community, but, I'm sorry, what was the question?
00:35:20
So just, if they, how they developed, like, a marketing plan, did they utilize, like, newsletters and emails?
00:35:26
Yeah, so, so she was, she created a newsletter, we highlighted employees. We definitely want to re-establish that, because since the previous marketing coordinator has left, we haven't picked that up, and I would love to see that happen again. So, there are those things that we do, we just haven't done them in the past recently, I want to say. But yes, we definitely want to include the newsletters, so she's definitely going to reactivate those things. The volunteer program is one of the things that is her pride and joy, because we created a program where she definitely stays in contact with and creates a schedule, has a work listing of what they need to do, and handles work orders from the different departments that request assistance. Which has been great, because we've had continuous employees, we've had times to do honorariums and things like that. It's… it's great. And not only that, for me, as a leader, planting seeds for future employees, being able to see who we can bring in with experience, and not only that, but hands-on experience through the volunteer program. So, I'm hoping to see that grow out a little more as, as she definitely creates and enhances it as we go forward, but…I want to see more things like that. We're definitely going to continue the newsletter, as well as what they call our Lati Day, where we're bringing in a man twice a year, and then getting them more involved with the forum and what we're doing here.
00:36:39
Hmm. Okay, that's wonderful. Definitely thinking about all those different ways. I mean, people use, social media for, like, so many different things, you know, to get the word out, just like, getting in touch with Amy, you know, where I haven't, seen her in, like, years and years, but just getting in touch, you know, via social media, it definitely helps. So, do you utilize social media, like, for your… for people to learn about your co-op?
00:37:10
Yes, we've… Of course, I want to say Instagram, Facebook, all those things, Twitter, they definitely cover all those bases with the marketing department. With our… at different events, we definitely want to advert… we definitely show out through those different spaces, but we also have a website that's dedicated to the farm. We try to keep it updated as much as possible. It's a… it's our main source of information, but of course, we like to refer people to the Facebook, the Instagram pages to make sure that they can kind of get current, active, live data, live dates and information when it comes to different things we're doing on the farm. We've done our live events when it comes to, I want to say, not this past Halloween, but last year, we did a Halloween on the farm, where we did a whole marketing day, a farmer's market. We had a corn, sorry, a hay maze. They had a…one of the employees running around with their phone, they were on live stream, of course, giving you the on-the-ground reports and things. It was great to see. We recently added a video to our YouTube channel, which highlights some of the staff, just giving them…giving people an insight of what they like to do and why they like to work on the farm, and that's one of our newer things. We're looking at creating a YouTube channel that highlights not only just the staff, but the different departments, the different things we do, the process of our hay production, our food growth. It's actually a script that I created for the YouTube channel that I gave to the marketing people, so I'm hoping that YouTube video was a test that they recently did to, with the youth workers of this past summer to create and see if they could develop something based off what I gave them, and I'm glad to see it, but I'm hoping to see a lot more on our YouTube channel to enhance and connect us with the community, because, of course, one of our biggest things is our hay production, and encouraging people, ensuring that we do not spray. It's all natural, and as well as our food, and how… Challenging it is to grow the food without having to spray things. It's… it's just being able to highlight some of those things, but, definitely doing that through social media. Keep an eye out for YouTube, because that's one of our biggest things that we're looking at coming into the future.
00:39:21
Hmm. Absolutely. Thank you for explaining some of that. I mean, it's just, you know, it's with these different trends that are happening and going on with, like, like, these different TikTok dances and all of that, and it's just sort of like, you know, a lot of people, like, dismiss social media, but it's also a good way to keep in contact with people, or to, like, promote your organization, so there's definitely some plus sides to it, for sure. And so, it's just, it's just interesting all around. So, with, does your cooperative offer ongoing education and training to its members? Because you mentioned some of that previously, like how people had different types of education and training, but is that something that your cooperative offers?
00:40:05

Page 3

Yes, well, actually, when we did the first day, training and the first day emergency response training, we involved the community members. We had, I want to say, 3 or 4 community members that came out and took part with the training with staff, which was great to see, because our goal was to have it be a community-based efforts so that we had individuals that were ready to respond to, any kind of issue within the community, whether that be an employee or community members. So, again, training, whether it be beneficial to the staff, to the community member, it's… there's a site at the… on here at the farm, we have a conference room with a digital screen and everything where you can do PowerPoints. We have an on-site place where we've done classes for horseshoe training. We definitely have the spot for that, so working with Organization_5, they brought out an individual. We had the hosted site, provided the materials they needed, and they brought this fancy trailer with all these burners and things. It was really nice, but a mobile classroom, basically, is what they called it, but…we have the site and the resources to definitely host these number of different events, whether they be educational, or entertainment… entertainment-wise. We do movie nights here on the Forum, for example. But, yeah, we… we take every opportunity. For me, specifically, personally, education's always…a great thing, and any opportunity you can to take to educate somebody is what we do here on the farm. But, yes, workshops, gatherings, celebrations, there's always some sort of educational component involved.
00:41:39
Absolutely. That's… you know, there's so many different ways to make things work, and it's just… and it's great, you know, that you're… that you're pivoting, you know, you're trying to figure out what's going to work with, like, different, you know, different learners, different… even, like, generations of learners, and it's really important to think about where those things are. We're trying to get, a tribal college established in Location_14, so just thinking about those different dynamics of, like, how to engage learners and, like, the different ways that, you know, people… people learn, you know, how they work with different things, you know. There's some that, you know, love, like, a tangible textbook style, and then others that don't. You know, they just like to get a lot of their information via, like, social media and things like that. So it's just really interesting trying to figure out what works and all of that.
00:42:27
Yeah, Native communities are unique in that, too, as well, because we have that, watch and learn upbringing, of course, and cultural kind of basis, so I always say that for me in school, it was hard to read a book and apply it, because I never saw it happen. Sure. Seeing something happen is a lot more easier for me to encode it and move forward, and then teach people how to do it, so…I always try to incorporate that when… yeah, we're doing the PowerPoint, but now we have to do it physically to make sure people see it and get it memorized into their muscle memory, into their brains. Natives always need that physical education, definitely involved with it.
00:43:03
Absolutely, absolutely. That is…very, very much so, like, how things are working. And so, it's really important. So, speaking of that, speaking of the community and thinking of, like, different types of learners, Can you…describe how the community, maybe interacts with the co-op, like, especially, like, during, you know, things change, especially, like, we were all impacted by COVID-19 and these global pandemics. Like, how did things…change with that. Like, either in term… especially in terms of, like, working with, like, the farm and the community.And then… And then all of it. How have things changed as of now?
00:43:45
One of the things I've brought in since, well, I guess for COVID, for example, is more food production. When COVID happened, I was an equipment operator, and we were running bales… baling every night. With the curfews happening and stuff, we'd have to stay here overnight, so we do maintenance. Trimming weeds and things like that along the edges of the fields and stuff, staying busy, but…I… I… I noticed that there wasn't a whole lot of… Of, you know acres being done with food production. Since coming on as management, we've pushed that a little bit, and my first year, we did about 70 acres of food production, and they wanted… I want to say they knocked out about 40% of that, which was good to see. But from how they were operating before, which was only about 40 acres they were… giving them more gives them bigger opportunity. We focused on our 60-day corn the first year, and it exploded. And not only that, but applying the science of it. Nit… corn needs nitrogen to grow. Alfalfa is a nitrogen fixation crop. Applied to the rotation. Simple concept, simple science, and it's exploded our seed today corn.
We've had success in some of those, some of those successes are still sitting in our coasters that need to be cleaned. We had to mow down fields because we couldn't get to them, and they grew back the following year, and what we did was just open those fields to the community to come and harvest on their own. In ag, they call them volunteer crops, where they… they're from previous years. And so, of course, without having to grow them, we weren't too sure on what they were going to come out as. Opportunity to give it to the community, everybody came in and harvested their own. It was a great crop, but of course, it's…It's in our… taking out those opportunities to include the community is what we definitely included, but, applying the science has helped us out a whole lot more. I'm sorry, what was the question? I digress.
00:45:34
Oh, just, you know, thinking about how you were able to, like, pivot. Like, you've mentioned about, like, being able to, like, to adapt to things, and especially, like, these global pandemics.
00:45:43
Oh, yeah.
00:45:44
Like, COVID and all of that.
00:45:46
It's just seen more food crops. We've given the food production a lot more resources, a lot more opportunities. We've done, honestly, in my opinion, a lot of soil remedies in the past several years because of the fact that they've only been operating out of 140 acres for several seasons.
Without rotation, you deplete the soil, and I don't understand why the past management hasn't understood that, but again education to the staff, giving them the resources, we've had that explode. COVID was a lesson for us, and we definitely want to grow our food production more, and then provide that food for not just, purchase, but for opportunity for commodities, for example. We've had a grant. We've had business with Organization_7, where they received a grant for the commodities program to purchase local produce. They purchased, flour, a number of, I want to say, grains from us, for their commodities program. Which is a great partnership to see, but also, would love to see that more within the nation, of course. I think we put a bid in for the nation, and we didn't get it here locally, but we got that one for the Location_13 Reservation. So it was, again, finding those opportunities, but also making sure you're supporting the local community. It was what the COVID, had definitely given us. Right now. With the current government shutdown, this past Friday, we actually teamed up with Organization_11, to do food boxes for tribal members that were being affected by either the, layout, the not paying of government workers, or the, not receiving of SNAP benefits and things like that, were… we were definitely a whole site, we got involved. It was great to see, but…it's an opportunity… it's a lesson moving forward, you know, I would love to see more of our products be evolved. It was a last-minute plan, but again we're working currently on trying to make sure that we can grow our Tempur V inventory, which is very low, and again. Seeds like these can't just be bought from Organization_15 across the street, or ordered online from Organization_22. We have to save these, and we always get this every year, and it's heartful for me, but we aren't able to sell seeds, and in my plan, I think pepper beans are about 2-3 years out from being sold in the store again, to be able to create our inventory back up. And it's… it's unfortunate, but it's a structure that we have to stick to to be able to have… provide those products to our people, so lessons moving forward are all of these things, all… all of this for us, depending on how the this continuing, or this voting works out over the weekend, we might… we might do another food give-out next Friday, they talked about already, so…It's, taking these opportunities as lessons. And how we do things successful again the next round is what we've definitely been doing. The corn and the adaptation to the crop rotation is an example of that. and COVID, is an encouragement to, I guess what I say to the farm to do a little better, because I felt like we could have been able to provide more had we been growing more food. And so we definitely encourage that more with our plan and our staff here with our team.
00:48:58
Wow, definitely. That's…so many people have learned so many things from that, you know, like how to be prepared and all of that, and so hopefully we don't encounter another global pandemic, yet if we do, we're going to be more prepared, you know, in the future.
00:49:15
So, we definitely, you know, getting a chance to, like, learn from that, for sure.
00:49:20
you know, thinking about those different things, because I think that's the, like, the largest global pandemic that we have experience, you know? I mean, of course, there have been, like, different, like, things that have happened, but it's definitely impacted so many different people, and, like, that's one of the things that we have definitely talked about in our classes, and thinking about all of that. So, to wrap everything up, you know, looking to the future. Is this the impact that you thought the cooperative would have? And, like, what are your plans for the long run?
00:49:56
Yes, it is the impact I thought it would have, you know, and I think speaking with elders, with the exception of things… some of the things that management has done in the past, we are doing what they wanted us to do. Especially in my past several years of being more engaged. My first year as manager, we…we reported to the… we went to Organization_14 meeting, where they gathered all the landowners, and I reported, you know, I gave a report. Gave all the numbers, opened the books and everything, you know, it was… it's all about being transparent, I think, is…is what people, like, love to see. But, just continuing that, involving the community, involving the landowners, and…I guess, for lack of a better description, just having more science. I guess this inclusion of that idea of the nitrogen fixation of our alfalfa has given it a better perspective of just more than a cash crop. You know, we sometimes will grow a field, we'll…plow all that in. We won't harvest it. It's… it's food for the soil in the long run, and so taking sacrifices and opportunities during… when you can, like those, are what we definitely want to do moving forward, but I mean 10 years out from now, I would love to see a 50-50 of food production and feed for the farm. They're looking at expanding 1,000 acres on the other side of I-19, which is in development and planning right now, and if that happens, then we definitely need to be at 50-50. I would love to see more food. That's… that's my goal and my mission as a manager coming out to the farm, is more food. More food is our biggest goal. Our biggest mission, and…in the long run, should be that, that, sustainable resource for the community. And not only that, but the greater community of southern Location_9, the southern… southern United States, the western Location_9, western region of the United States. I would love to see more of that, because in the past, it was… our people have been able to provide millions and millions of pounds of tempered beans off the nation, and to see that reduced to just a couple thousand. Over the years, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's… heart-wrenching, and and my goal would be to see more of that going back out the door, so…Person_8 is doing a great job with their temper beans, and I think that's the scale we want to reach at one point, so, to have a goal, I think that would be my goal, to reach their acreage, to reach their scale, and to be able to provide more food for our people.
00:52:35
That's wonderful. That's definitely important. And I guess, you know, the last question that I have for you is about climate change. You know, you were talking about all these different things that you want, you know, for your farm and all of that, and especially thinking about the future. How do you think climate change, excuse me, factors into all of that?
00:52:55
It is a factor right now. You know, with the… around this time of the year, we're usually dwindling out. We do our last cut around October, November. Hay production shuts down for the year. The fields go into… I want to say, dormancy, for the lack of a better description. And they don't grow very much. They kind of shrub rather than grow height. To survive the winter, and then we go into a light irrigation session that keeps the soil from freezing and killing out the plants. In the past… 3 years? we've been cutting into December. I think there was a year when we were harvesting and baling on New Year's Day, which was really unusual. Because it, for alfalfa, it loves warm, cold nights and warm days to be able to grow really well. And when you don't have the temperature dropping below 60 overnight, it… it doesn't… doesn't…define that as a cold night. It keeps growing. And then, of course, that stunts the growth of it, the production of it, and the regrowth in the long run. So, climate change is a big factor, especially for food production. I'm sorry, feed production. And we've definitely tried to take some approaches by incorporating different crops, like teff grass, for example, which is a warm season crop.You only get 3 cuts, it only grows for several months, I'm gonna say 4 to 3 months out throughout the year.
And then it dies instantly. Similar to Bermuda grass, so it takes a good value, but it's not as big of a hit, and as big of an impact as alfalfa. So, teff grass, Location_2 grass, oats, a couple other things that we try to incorporate into our feeds to make sure that we're providing nutrients.
At a great level, but also, doing it at a better approach that isn't affecting our cell too much. Of course, in the past, I haven't been rotating, so depleting our cells is our biggest thing, but…climate change is definitely everywhere we go. With our food production, several… I want to say about 8, 9 years ago, we had a New Year's snowfall, and it was beautiful, snow stuck around, but…for us, we had just planted alfalfa. My first thought that morning was, oh no, this isn't good. Our trees, our orchards, which included peaches, which people love here on the farm, they were stunted. And for 3 years after that, they didn't grow. They didn't produce peaches, and…it was all because of that random snap in the weather, which is probably due to the climate change, of course, and now we're still seeing colder nights as we get into New Year's and things like that, so…It's unusual, you know, and right now we should be seeing the cold weather settle in, but it… right now I'm sitting in the tractor cab, and I had to crack a window because it's so hot out here. It's like the 90s over the next couple days is what they're predicting, and it's just unusual to see the weather fluctuate so much, you know? My first year as a supervisor for feed production, we had, I think, I want to say, 10 inches of rain in one summer. We lost 3 cuts… 3 to 4 cuts that year. We had a big hit in revenue, and that was my first year as operations supervisor for the free production crew. big experience, but again, lessons moving forward. And my understanding of science and education. Climate change is a big factor, and a lot of those reasons why the fluctuation in weather has been happening. But we continue to monitor, we continue to educate our staff. And be safe as we go forward with adapting to the weather. It's just… it's all we can do at this point. We're at the mercy of nature. In the past, they've adapted to these things, and understanding and adapting is what we do to move forward right now.
00:56:25
Absolutely. Absolutely. Mr. Andrews, thank you. Thank you for taking this time to impart so much knowledge and information about your co-op and about, you know, the land and the community, about… because those are all relevant and important factors that, people don't, you know, they know about to a degree, but they don't know, like, how much, you know, is involved. And so, just thinking about all of that, and you were able to share some of that, so thank you. Thank you for taking this time. Pamela, do you have any additional questions for… for Mr. Andrews?
00:57:03
Yes, thank you so much for your time. I wanted to ask you a question. About what you guys did, I believe it was in the 70s, when you protected the water under the ground where your farming land is, and how did that come about? Like, was it the farmers, the… the… your tribal government? How did you guys win that lawsuit to protect that water from Location_1?
00:57:34
I wanna say it was a combination of…the land defenders at the time that were, of course, protecting all the resources in the land of Organization_14 here in San Javier. And the support of the, of Organization_25, because the lawsuit started with, Organization_18 and the landowners here. And as the water issues began to grow, the nation jumped on board and supported what was going on here, and…Really just kind of, gave it that extra oomph it needed to be able to go through and pass and get, approved in the courts, of course, but I… I believe that's what it was, and not only that, but…Today, even today, I know we're seeing water issues, whether it could be the Location_8 River, lack of rainfall in certain areas. Native American people have said it since the beginning of that separation of water. You know, we need to respect it, and we have… we…should have had a seat at the table. And because of that, we're seeing all of these issues happen. And now that we're being able to give some of our input, our advice, you know, it's…It's almost to say that we're…too late, but it's not too late, you know? We just definitely need to apply more respect for the resources we're having, but it's that support for the nation, the things that were happening up north with Hilla River, up the tribes up north, along the Location_8 River.that travel support, as I think, is what was really, the push to get that, that, that, that passed in the courts at the time.
00:59:10
Thank you. Just thank you so much for your time, and I know how busy you guys are all the time. And we're just so grateful to, You know, to be…just… I'm really impressed, because so many times with a cooperative that has this age, you know, it's been around since the 70s, that you've got someone new and young like you that really knows the history of this cooperative. And that's so critical, because so many times, you know, when… when people that have been there since the beginning, when they leave, that institutional memory leaves with them, so…I'm really happy to hear that you know the history of this co-op and its impact on the community, and you're just doing a great job, and I just wish you the very best in everything that you do.
01:00:05
Which is Thank you. Thank you.
01:00:09
Absolutely. Thank you for taking this time. And for meeting with us, and…It's huge. My hope is that, like, you know, as these students are going through this data, this information, that they are also learning, and they are. You know, and we've… we've been able to talk with so many different people doing different types of… doing different types of work, and they've been able to, like talk about the different things that they've learned, and I know they're going to learn quite a bit from this as well, that, that it's definitely happening. So I definitely am grateful for the way that you're… that you're educating us.The ways that you're, showing us new information that we… that we… people haven't thought about before, and you're… and you're bringing that to us.
01:00:51
Definitely how we move forward is working with each other and sharing information. At least that's how I was raised, so I… I always have that put forward when it comes to anything, and…when it comes to academia, I love to be supportive, especially with the students. I was a student myself, trying to get those papers in, and…meet those deadlines and get those good grades, so… education is a major factor in, you know, anyone coming up, anyone trying to learn about anything. Definitely supportive, so… You're welcome, for sure.
01:01:22
Wonderful. Well, I know you have a busy day ahead of you, and that you have so much work to do. Thank you for taking this time to meet with us, and I will talk to you soon. If you have any additional, questions that you have for us, feel free to, like, send them over, andYeah, we can go from there.
01:01:41

Page 4

Likewise, if there's anything or any kind of future presentations or something you want to set up, I'm all about scheduling, you know, as you saw with our communication through emails, of course, I got a lot going on, but as long as we can schedule something, I will put that time aside for you, to be out there, of course, but…Yeah, no, likewise, thank you for the opportunity to share about what we're doing here at the farm.
01:02:01
Absolutely. Well, take care of yourself, and I will talk to you soon.
01:02:04
Thank you, Person_3, thank you, Person_1.
01:02:06
Yes, thank you, Person_2.
You ladies, have a good day.
01:02:10
You too.
01:02:11
Thank you.
01:02:16
So how was that?

================================================================================
CITATION REFERENCE TABLE
================================================================================

Speaker.Verse   Timestamp    Speaker Role        
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
